                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. KELLY:  Good afternoon, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          THE PANEL:  Good afternoon.
          MR. KELLY:  May it please the court.
     Counsel and Mr. Sammarco and ladies and
     gentlemen of the jury.
          It's nice to be able to look at you and
www.phippsreporting.com
888 811-3408

     talk directly to you again.  It's been a couple
     of weeks, and I've been avoiding you in the
     hallways, so now I get to talk directly to you.
     And I have some considerable ground to cover.
     I'll try to do it in an organized fashion so
     that it will be helpful to you in the jury
     room.
          You have some very serious issues to
     decide shortly.  Some of them are going to be
     simple.  I think some of them are going to be
     kind of complex.  Some of them could be very
     technical in areas that you don't normally find
     yourself considering issues in, like in the
     medical field.
          But whether it's simple or complicated or
     technical, they are all serious.  And we are
     very grateful.  I speak, I think, on behalf of
     everybody.  I'm just really mimicking Mr. Bass'
     comments.  We are very grateful that we have a
     jury who is going to be fair and responsible
     and objective, not going to be swayed by any
     emotion or feelings for or against either side.
     That's so very important, and we are so very
     grateful you've promised to do that, and going
     to follow the instructions. 3862
          And with that, I'm going to get to
     discussing the evidence.  I'm not going to
     cover all the evidence, you'll be grateful to
     hear.  I'm going to try and focus on the
     evidence that relates to Mrs. Sammarco.
          For example, you heard today from Mr. Bass
     that he thinks that the evidence indicates that
     Mrs. Sammarco was somehow influenced by
     something that happened in 1954 that continued
     to influence her all the way up to 1982, as if
     nothing happened to Mrs. Sammarco between 1954
     and 1982.
          You know from the evidence that a lot
     happened to Mrs. Sammarco from 1954 to 1982,
     and I'm going to focus on that evidence, not
     the evidence that doesn't relate to
     Mrs. Sammarco.
          I'm not going to be able respond to every
     document.  I'm only going to respond to those
     that relate to Mrs. Sammarco.
          During Mr. Bass' closing, he asked a
     number of questions, and I assumed he wasn't
     asking them of you, because you can't respond.
     So I thought I'd write some of those questions
     down, and I'd answer them for Mr. Bass. 3863
          And to start off with that kind of a
     response, Robert, could I please have the ELMO.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MR. KELLY:  So Mr. Bass asked the
     question, why do we put on evidence?  And I
     think he was making reference to the fact that
     we are going to argue here a whole bunch of
     evidence, why do we have to put on the
     evidence?
          Well, the evidence is what you take back
     to the jury room to base your deliberations on.
     That's what you decide the case on in light of
     the evidence and the instructions, the
     documents, the witnesses.
          What I'm doing now, what Mr. Bass did and
     what Mr. Scarola did and will do, is not
     evidence.  None of what we're saying is
     evidence.  The evidence, you've already heard.
     It's in the box, the box you're taking back to
     the jury room with you.  So please don't
     confuse what happens in argument with what
     happened from the witness stand.
          Mr. Bass asked the question, who were not
     called as witnesses?  And so I thought I'd give
     him at least a response from our side that 3864
     suggests just a partial list of all of the
     medical witnesses the plaintiff did not call.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I
     object.  That's improper argument.  The
     witnesses were equally available to be called
     by both sides.
          THE COURT:  The objection is overruled.
          MR. KELLY:  Dr. Bates.  You all know
     Dr. Bates.  He -- you haven't met him, but you
     know his name.  He was the personal primary
     care physician doctor for Mr. and Mrs. Sammarco
     dating back to the late '80s.  Still practicing
     here in the area.  And his records are
     fundamental, a foundation of the claim that
     plaintiffs are making with respect to
     manifestation.  He was not called as a witness.
          Dr. Jancko is also referenced in the
     medical records.  You're going to have all the
     medical records back in the jury room, for
     better or for worse.  There's a whole bunch of
     them, but the ones that I'm going to be talking
     about are all in evidence for you to take back
     and review.
          One of them is Dr. -- from Dr. Morris.
     Dr. Morris is the ENT, the ear, nose and throat 3865
     specialist who treated Mrs. Sammarco for the
     hemoptysis back in '96.  He also practices
     here.  He wasn't called as a witness.
          And then there's a whole bunch of
     testimony, at least argument, I should say, a
     whole bunch of argument -- and I made the
     mistake, too.  Argument is not evidence --
     whole bunch of argument about radiology and
     pathology and what could have been found, what
     would have been found, what might have been
     found had someone looked.
          Well, the folks who actually found the
     tumor and did the biopsy, the radiologist and
     the pathologist, were never called as witnesses
     in the case.  The entire medical case is
     dependent upon Dr. Abel, who I'm going to talk
     about a little bit more.
          Counsel indicated that according to
     Dr. Burns, Mrs. Sammarco was addicted by the
     year 1954.  That would be before Mr. Sammarco
     met her, and we don't know anything about the
     circumstances in Mrs. Sammarco's life that the
     age by which -- which influenced her to start
     smoking.  There's just no evidence in the
     record whatsoever.  There's not even any 3866
     evidence in the record of what cigarette brand
     was being smoked at the time she became
     addicted to cigarettes.
          There was reference to if a CT scan were
     done.  And on that point, I wrote up here on
     the board a pretty important date for you, I
     think, under the instructions you're getting
     with respect to the manifestation claim.
          As of November 21, 1996, the signs and
     symptoms that you're going to be considering on
     that issue are those that existed as of
     November 21, 1996.  And if a CT scan were done,
     we don't have to guess about a CT scan.
     Several were done.  We know when they were
     done.  They were done after November 21, 1996.
     And that's what we'll be talking about in the
     evidence.
          Mr. Bass suggested that Dr. Abel had
     testified that Theresa Sammarco's signs and
     symptoms were identifiable and diagnosable
     before November 21, '96.  And you'll see when
     you get into the jury room and have the
     instructions to look at that on manifestation,
     this term "diagnosable" is very important
     because not only do the signs and symptoms have 3867
     to be present as of November 21, '96, they had
     to be diagnosable as lung cancer by that date.
          And so this is what Mr. Bass said that
     Dr. Abel was going to talk about.  I'm going to
     point out to you, I think, a little bit later
     in the presentation exactly what he said when
     testifying here in court, and what he said was
     that they -- those signs and symptoms
     identifiable by November 21, '96, you could not
     diagnose lung cancer from.  They were not
     diagnosable, is Dr. Abel's testimony.  And I'll
     show it to you when we get to that part of the
     presentation.
          Counsel indicated that Dr. Abel said these
     symptoms were all lung cancer symptoms.  We'll
     show you the record testimony from Dr. Abel
     that all of these symptoms are what is called
     nonspecific symptoms, symptoms which are not
     specific to lung cancer and can't be described
     as lung cancer symptoms because they are
     nonspecific, which means they could be caused
     by any number of conditions.
          Talking now about Mrs. Sammarco, counsel
     briefly spoke about Mrs. Sammarco, that is
     Mr. Bass did, and this is a quote that I heard. 3868
     "She believed that Lights were safer, just like
     they were advertising," and I think there was a
     gesture over to the defense table.
          And speaking of the defense table, I want
     to thank you not only on behalf of myself, but
     on behalf of Mr. Sexton and Mr. Carpenter and
     all the folks that have been helping keep us
     organized here for serving as jurors.  So on
     behalf of them, thank you.
          So, she believed that Lights were safer,
     just like they were advertising.  You can look
     through all the evidence in the case.  You're
     going to have it back there in a couple of
     boxes maybe, and you're going to see a lot of
     advertisements maybe from the '30s, and '40s,
     and the '50s.  Lights, Marlboro Lights, were
     introduced in the 1970s.  There is no
     advertisement for Marlboro Lights in evidence,
     let alone any that says Lights were safer.
     There's not one Marlboro Light ad in evidence.
          I think counsel indicated:  "The plaintiff
     admits Mrs. Sammarco is partly at fault for
     causing her injury and death because" -- and
     this is a quote from Mr. Bass -- "for whatever
     reason, she didn't try hard enough to quit. 3869
     For whatever reason."
          Mr. Bass did not say because of addiction,
     or because she didn't know smoking was
     dangerous.  He said, "For whatever reason, she
     didn't try hard enough to quit."
          The record testimony in the case
     indicates, as described to her son, John
     Junior, Mrs. Sammarco told him she didn't quit
     because she believed that it wouldn't happen to
     her.
          Not that she was too addicted, not that
     she didn't know it was dangerous.  She told her
     son that she didn't believe it would happen to
     her, and so she continued smoking.  That's the
     record testimony in the case.
          You don't have to guess of what the reason
     is that Mrs. Sammarco continued smoking.  It's
     already in the case through the testimony of
     her son.
          I'm going to start talking about
     manifestation.  That was the first element of
     the -- excuse me for not turning around -- that
     was the first element of class definition that
     was in the jury instructions, so that's where
     I'm going to start in my discussion with you of 3870
     the evidence and the law.  And I thought it
     would be helpful to put into context the
     evidence we are going to talk about by letting
     you know where I think it takes us.  Add up all
     the evidence and you come to a bottom line.
     And I put what I think the bottom line is here
     for the evidence on manifestation.  And I've
     broken it down signs, symptoms and the
     requirement to be diagnosable.
          Signs.  The first sign of lung cancer was
     observable February 28th, 1997.  That's the
     x-ray.  There was no sign of lung cancer
     observable before November 21, 1996.
          And I'll explain that to you in a moment
     when we talk about the evidence, but the -- I
     was going to use an analogy.  I've got my
     briefcase here.  I think I left a quarter in my
     briefcase.  It may or may not be in there.  I
     can show you the briefcase, we could look at
     the briefcase, and that quarter is not
     observable.  The quarter's inside and we don't
     have the capability to look through things with
     the naked eye.  You can't hear it, it's not
     making any noise in there; it's not like my
     cell phone, it's not going to ring, hopefully. 3871
     And we aren't going to be able to feel it,
     because it's got all sorts of stuff in here,
     other than maybe that quarter.  So it's not
     observable for us right now.
          But -- but, if I took this downstairs to
     the guard and asked him to run it through the
     scanner, on the x-ray machine down there, then,
     maybe, maybe that quarter might be observable.
     But it depends.
          It depends on what else is in the bag.  It
     depends on whether anybody is actually looking
     for the quarter when they run it through the
     scanner.  Whether the scanner is good enough to
     pick up my quarter or not.
          Same is true with Mrs. Sammarco and the
     radiology.  Before November 21, 1997, the tumor
     was up in the upper right azygos lobe area of
     the right lung inside, not observable with the
     naked eye, couldn't hear it, couldn't feel it,
     not observable, unless there was an x-ray or a
     CAT scan available to look for it.
          You remember Dr. Abel.  Dr. Abel, at one
     time, thought that there was a CT scan in March
     of '96.  There was that typographical error,
     the March of '97 CT scan was actually March of 3872
     '96.  And so for a long period of time he
     thought there was a CT scan March of '96 that
     someone had just missed observing the tumor and
     the mass until it was sent for diagnosis later
     in '97.
          Well, that's a good example of a CT scan
     in which the tumor was not observed, but was
     observable.  It was observed in '97, or so he
     thought.  And then he learned that the
     typographical error had been made and there was
     no CT scan in March of '96.  That was a
     mistake.
          Well, that mistake has consequences
     because there's no longer anything before
     November 21, '96, by which the tumor could be
     observable.  Okay.  So that's signs.
          Symptoms.  Before November 21, '96, all
     the symptoms were nonspecific.  We are going to
     go through those symptoms, and the testimony
     from Dr. Abel and Dr. Keller is identical that
     none of those symptoms are specific to lung
     cancer; they are all nonspecific.  Cannot
     diagnosis lung cancer from symptoms.  It has to
     be diagnosable.
          This testimony is not disputed.  Lung 3873
     cancer can only be diagnosed with a biopsy.
     Can't diagnose from an x-ray.  Can't diagnose
     from a CT scan.  Have to go in and get some
     tissue and look at it under the microscope by
     the pathologist to see if you can diagnose.
     That's the testimony.  And we'll show you the
     records of how that proceeded.
          And the first biopsy was performed in
     April of '97.  That's some of the evidence from
     the bottom line -- we'll get into more detail
     in a minute.
          Robert, would you please switch me over to
     the computer?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.  It's switched.
          MR. KELLY:  Okay.  Ready now?
          MR. SCAROLA:  Point it at Hardee.
          MR. KELLY:  Okay.  Now, Hardee used the
     actual drawing that Mr. Sexton did when he was
     up on the examination and I've -- I haven't
     done it, but we had it made a little bit more
     easily readable for you during this part of the
     case.
          So, here is November 21, '96.  That's the
     date the window closes on the class claim that
     Mr. Sammarco's making.  And you look before 3874
     November 21, '96, and I think now there's no
     dispute in the record that there's no x-ray or
     CT scan from which a tumor would be observable
     before November 21, '96.
          That the first x-ray on which something is
     seen is February 28th, '97.  And what is seen
     is a prominent azygos lobe, not identified as
     cancer, obviously not diagnosed as such because
     you can't diagnose cancer from a chest x-ray.
     But a month later a CT scan is done and the CT
     scan is -- has identified a mass in the upper
     right azygos lobe, and identifies it as being
     about three by three and a half centimeters,
     having been growing all that time to that size
     as it's identified.
          And then there's a needle biopsy into the
     mass in April, that is uncertain -- the
     experts, I think, conclude that the records
     don't reflect whether it was positive or a
     false-negative, they weren't sure from the
     records, but there's no diagnosis made of the
     biopsy of the mass in the right lung.
          The diagnosis isn't made for certain until
     May 13th when the metastatic lymph node
     biopsy's done and the cells are identified, and 3875
     that's when the diagnosis was made.
          So that timing sequence, there's no
     criticism of the amount of time that it took to
     go from point A, to point B, to point C, to
     point D to get to diagnosis, but it's
     undisputed that all of that is required before
     you get to diagnosis.
          You can't say that an x-ray finding is
     diagnosable, at least the doctors don't say
     that.  The CT scan, you cannot diagnosis from,
     you have to do the biopsy.
          Let me talk about growth rate just for a
     second.  We'll get into it in a little bit more
     detail, but now that I've got the timeline up
     here let me spend a moment on growth rate,
     because both Dr. Abel and Dr. Keller said the
     same thing.  And they said -- you know, there's
     more that they agreed to sometimes than you
     might have thought, but as we look through the
     record, this is one thing they agreed on.
          If you have a tumor that's growing at .1,
     and you measure it with a CT scan, and later,
     sometime later, you measure that tumor again,
     with the same CT scan, you can determine for
     that tumor, and that tumor alone, a growth 3876
     rate.
          You have two points in time, two different
     measurements, and you can determine a growth
     rate for that tumor if there's no treatment in
     between.  Both Dr. Abel and Dr. Keller said if
     there's treatment in between, then you can't
     establish a growth rate because you alter the
     growth rate once there's treatment.
          And that's what happened with
     Mrs. Sammarco's tumor.  There was a measurement
     on this CT scan, there was the diagnosis and
     treatment began right away.  The next CT scan,
     getting a dimension on the tumor for
     Mrs. Sammarco, is in July.  By July, treatment
     had already started.
          So, there can be, and there is, not in the
     record, any specific precise growth rate for
     Mrs. Sammarco's tumor because they don't have
     the two data points uninterrupted by treatment.
          Now, back when Mr. Able -- I'm sorry,
     Dr. Abel -- I apologize -- Dr. Abel was first
     hired, retained in the case, he was given two
     medicals records and two medical records only.
     And one of them had the March '96 date on it,
     with the CT scan, the typographic error.  And 3877
     it started him down the path of believing that
     manifestation occurred in November '96, because
     there was a CT scan in March of '96.  If
     there's a CT scan in March of '96, then, of
     course, there's a sign before November 21, '96.
     He called it "a slam dunk."
          Well, appropriate term for this time of
     year, with the basketball tournament on, but as
     some of us have been watching, no, if you're
     Duke, Villanova, or Syracuse, you thought you
     had a slam dunk, but you did not.  And it turns
     out Dr. Abel did not either, because the
     March '96 CT scan turned out to be a
     typographical error.  The medical records
     didn't reflect any other x-ray or CT scan
     before November 21, '96.  And he had to start
     down the path of trying to figure out a theory
     by which he could establish a tumor size before
     November 21, '96.  And that's the doubling rate
     episode that Dr. Abel embarked on.
          Now, Mr. Scarola spent a lot of time
     talking to Dr. Abel about growth rate and
     doubling time; and did I, too.  And Mr. Scarola
     spent a lot of time shouting at Dr. Keller
     about growth rate and doubling time. 3878
          You were shown a slide from Dr. Keller
     suggesting that he'd only spent two hours in
     his entire career studying growth rate and
     doubling time.
          The reference indicates he's very familiar
     with doubling rate and growth analyses as used
     in scientific research, not validated for
     clinical research, and that he spent two hours
     studying the recent studies and literature that
     he talked about on examination.
          Growth rate and doubling time, at one
     point in this case, before Dr. Abel went down
     the road and testified in the second
     deposition -- at his very first deposition,
     when he thought he had the slam dunk of the
     March '96 CT scan -- Dr. Abel testified, "I
     don't need to use a doubling rate or growth
     rate analysis," he said that three times.  "I
     don't intend to use it.  It's a coarse
     litigation technique," words he used at that
     deposition.
          He told you here at that time he admitted,
     at that first deposition, saying that that
     technique is not appropriate because you make
     assumptions that are not precise.  He admitted 3879
     that.
          And then when Dr. Keller was here and said
     it was a coarse litigation technique,
     Dr. Keller was challenged by counsel that
     Dr. Abel had -- I think I said that wrong.
          When Dr. Keller was testifying and he said
     Dr. Abel indicated it was a coarse litigation
     technique, and counsel challenged him that that
     really wasn't what he said at his first
     deposition, that was some later time, we went
     back and looked, and this is Dr. Abel's
     testimony here in court.
     "Question:  Now, at the first deposition, you
had described doubling time as a coarse litigation
technique; do you recall that?"
          Dr. Abel's answer:
     "Answer:  I certainly do."
          This is his first deposition in January of
     2011, before Dr. Keller's deposition when the
     defense position is laid out that the
     manifestation occurred in 1997, and before his
     second affidavit and his second deposition.  In
     his first deposition, he described growth rate
     and doubling time as a coarse litigation
     technique. 3880
          Now, when Dr. Abel came to testify in
     court, he had been retired for about eight
     years, had not been practicing medicine as an
     oncologist for eight years.  All he does now is
     testify in litigation matters for counsel.
          He was asked this on direct examination.
     "Question:  And you, as an oncologist, did you
use and apply concepts of tumor growth rate in your
own clinical practice?"
          This was a week or two ago.  He looked at
     you and he said:
     "Question:  Yes, I certainly did."
          And then we showed you Dr. Abel's sworn
     deposition testimony from 2003 in an entirely
     different case where he's asked these
     questions.
     "Question:  Is there a term of art that you use
in your field, sir, to describe growth rates of
malignant tumors?  You call it a growth rate or do
you call it something else, so you and I can
communicate on that topic?"
          Dr. Abel's answer was:
     "Answer:  Yes.  Well, no.  The term is not used
in my field.  It is used in your field, in
litigation.  And it is referred to as doubling 3881
time."
          Back when he was practicing -- he retired
     in 2006.  In 2003 when he gave this sworn
     deposition testimony, the question could not
     have been more clear.  And he said:
     "Question:  I don't use it in my field, either
growth rate or doubling time, not used in my field."
          Two weeks ago, he told you something
     entirely different.  That deposition in 2003
     goes on.
     "Question:  Well, within your field, do
oncologists and hematologists discuss the rate at
which malignancies grow?"
          Let me stop for a second and remind you
     that the distinction counsel tried to make in
     his closing argument between a pulmonologist
     and an oncologist is that oncologists use
     growth rate all the time.
          When he was asked this question in 2003:
     "Question:  Well, within your field, do
oncologists and hematologists discuss the rate at
which malignancies grow?"
          He answered:
     "Answer:  No.  I only discuss that with
lawyers." 3882
          I don't know if there's any way to
     reconcile the statement to you under oath in
     this courtroom that oncologists and he
     personally uses growth rate and doubling time
     in his practice and the testimony he gave under
     oath in 2003.
          The last question in the discussion.
     Well, if -- the lawyer asks him:
     "Question:  Well, if I use the term 'doubling
time,' then you'll know what that means, correct?
     "Answer:  I know what it means.  I hope you
know what it means."
          Now, this is one of those occasions on
     which Dr. Keller and Dr. Abel agreed.  It was
     for a very short period of time in this case,
     but at the time that Dr. Abel was originally
     deposed, back in January of 2011, he referred
     to this technique as a coarse litigation
     technique, which is the exact same opinion
     Dr. Keller told you about in the deposition
     back in 2003, Dr. Abel admitted that doubling
     time and growth rate are not used in a clinical
     practice.  And oncologists, specifically, do
     not use them.  They are only used with lawyers.
          And he came in here and he told you 3883
     something exactly the opposite, because without
     some credibility with you for his new theory
     using a doubling time, the case would go away.
          One other point on the use of doubling
     time and growth rate in a clinical practice,
     and, again, I think both Dr. Keller and
     Dr. Abel were in agreement at one point on
     this, growth rate and doubling time are not
     precise techniques.  It's based on assumptions,
     no question about it, about the size and the
     location and the density, all sorts of
     assumptions about the tumor that's being
     measured, but it's not precise.  You get a wide
     range of potential growth rates.
          In a clinical practice, no doctor is going
     to -- no medical professional, including
     doctors, is going to treat a patient that
     needs -- who needs precision with assumptions.
          The reason that Dr. Keller explained that
     growth rate and doubling time is a research
     tool for scientists and not used in a clinical
     practice is because you can't take a patient
     and assume they are going to be average.
     Because they could be anywhere else on the
     scatter.  So you treat what you're presented 3884
     with, and that's what you treat.
          So when we have Mrs. Sammarco presenting
     with a 3.0-centimeter mass, you treat that
     mass.  You don't care what it was three weeks
     ago.  You treat it right now.  That's why they
     need precision.  And they get precision from
     the CT scan.  And you do not get precision from
     the estimates the research scientists are able
     to provide with growth rate.
          Now, in considering Dr. Abel's testimony,
     which is the foundation for the plaintiff's
     manifestation claim, you can consider all of
     his testimony, both in this case and under oath
     in other cases.  Particularly, you can consider
     that when they are contradictory and there's no
     explanation why he changed his opinion so
     drastically.
          He was confronted in court with his prior
     testimony, confronted and allowed to explain.
     He explained a lot during his examination.  He
     never tried to explain how he said at one time
     we never use them, and in court certainly I do.
          You can consider Dr. Abel's demeanor while
     testifying.  Under the instructions, you can
     consider that.  I think a witness provides a 3885
     lot of nonverbal cues when they are testifying
     that you may pick up on, and you're entitled
     under the instructions to take into
     consideration what you see about that demeanor
     and whether the witness is responsive and
     provides objective responses and to-the-point
     responses or whether you get long explanations.
     You can take all that into consideration when
     you weigh the credibility, the believability of
     the witness.
          I'm going to take you back to opening
     statement for a moment, and in opening
     statement Mr. Scarola said that we can -- or
     that you can determine the actual doubling time
     of Mrs. Sammarco's tumor because there's a
     measurement on the CT scan in March, and
     there's a measurement in the CT scan in July,
     and one in November.  And you can see if you
     compare the measurements of the dimensions what
     the growth rate is for this specific tumor.
          What we found out from the evidence is
     that once treatment begins, the fact that the
     tumor doesn't seem to grow very much or very
     fast cannot be used to establish a growth rate.
     Both Dr. Abel and Dr. Keller said the same 3886
     thing.  This analysis cannot be used.
          What was needed in this case for the
     manifestation claim to have any legs was for
     there to be two points in time when there was
     measurements of the tumor without treatment in
     between.  And then you'd have a growth rate
     that you could at least discuss is applicable
     to this tumor and not some theoretical average
     tumor.
          So a word of caution about medical
     evidence.  The medical evidence comes in in the
     medical records.  And the medical evidence
     comes in through the witnesses, the doctors who
     testify.  The medical evidence does not come in
     through the lawyers.  We're not doctors.  We
     have to hire doctors.  Some of us avoided high
     school biology and didn't attend medical school
     or an internship, or a residency program, or a
     fellowship program and then acceptance in the
     American College of Pulmonary Physicians;
     others did.  Brought them in so they could help
     us address these issues and hopefully you
     understand them.
          The lawyers don't provide the medical
     evidence. We hopefully facilitate the evidence 3887
     getting to you, but what I say about medicine,
     please disregard what any attorney says about
     medicine.  It doesn't have any weight on the
     scales.
          So, Dr. Abel, using this litigation
     technique of taking what is a scientific
     analysis of growth forward and trying to put it
     back on average, did he give you a precise size
     for previous dates?  No.  He gave you a wide
     range and suggested that this tumor was the
     average.
          There's no basis at all to suggest that
     Mrs. Sammarco's tumor was average.  It was her
     tumor.  It was unique to her.  There isn't any
     reason to think it was on one side or the other
     or in the middle.  We'll never know.  We'll
     never know, because we don't have the data to
     know.
          That's the evidence.  And when the
     evidence is lacking, when the evidence is not
     here, through nobody's fault, it's just not
     available, it carries no weight on the scales
     of justice.  And if the claim is dependent upon
     information that's not here, the claim fails.
     That's the objective, fair way to assess 3888
     plaintiff's burden of proof.  It's the
     plaintiff's burden.  And the evidence has to be
     there.  It's not, maybe it was there or it
     could have been there or possibly was there.
     If it's not there, well, you have to call it as
     you see it.
          And this was -- I'll show you some of the
     diagrams that you've seen earlier in the case.
     Excuse me.  I'm not sure which one is the best
     to show you.
          Counsel, I'm showing this one.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Yes, thank you.
          MR. KELLY:  Okay.  So we have the mass in
     the right azygos lobe area of the lung, of the
     right lung.  I should say that better.  The
     upper azygos lobe area of the right lung.  And
     the question is, how big precisely was it at
     some point in time.  Nobody knows that.
          Would it at some smaller size have been
     observable on x-ray, given the structure in the
     area?  Unknown.  Dr. Keller gave you a pretty
     good summary of the anatomy of the chest and
     the lungs, and you know now there should be a
     clavicle across here, that azygos lobe area is
     hard to see on x-ray. 3889
          And that at a certain size -- at a certain
     location, certain size tumors are observable if
     there had been an x-ray done or if there'd been
     a CT done in some places.  And in some places,
     they are not.
          Dr. Abel never said that the tumor was
     observable by CT scan before November 21,
     '96 in that location where it was.  Why?  Never
     asked the question, first of all.  What would
     he have said?  Who knows.  But we do know that
     what the size was at some point in time before
     is not understood precisely.  And that whether
     a CT scan could find it or not was not asked of
     Dr. Abel, so there's no testimony to put on the
     scales of justice on the plaintiff's side on
     that point.
          And then the question goes on, though,
     because it's not enough to be able to observe
     something, you have to prove that you could
     observe it, but once you observe it, it's also
     got to be diagnosable.  Diagnosable.  That's
     the burden the plaintiffs have to establish.
          And Dr. Abel was never asked to say
     whether or not some size tumor smaller than
     3 centimeters could be biopsied and diagnosed. 3890
     Never asked.  He talked about diagnosable, but
     he was never asked that question, which is what
     the plaintiffs have to prove.
          Just the bottom line before I leave to
     talk a little bit about symptoms.  Whether or
     not there were signs before November 21, '96,
     is dependent upon your accepting Dr. Abel's
     opinion testimony about doubling time and
     growth rate, which I suggest to you is not
     worthy of belief, given his prior statements.
          We'll talk about symptoms in a moment, but
     there isn't any evidence that whatever size
     that tumor might have been, that it was
     diagnosable by biopsy in that location at that
     time.
          So you see, when you listen to the claims
     of could have and maybe and if, you start to
     build a series of ifs.  If this, well, then
     maybe if this, then maybe that, but then if
     this, that, that's not proof.  That's
     subjective guesswork.  That's not evidence.
     That's what you're left with from Dr. Abel's
     testimony concerning whether any signs were
     present, diagnosable, before November 21, '96.
          And then perhaps that's why so much of 3891
     Dr. Abel's time was spent talking about
     symptoms, the alternative theory that he came
     up with once the March '96 CT scan was seen as
     a typo.
          Okay.  Here is what we learned from the
     medical witnesses on symptoms.  That lung
     cancer is not diagnosable from symptoms.  No
     dispute in the evidence on that.  You've got to
     have something more than symptoms to diagnose.
     Remember, the standard is it has to be
     diagnosable before November 21, '96.
          Another undisputed fact, there are no
     specific symptoms of lung cancer.  Let me show
     you some testimony on that in a second.
          There are no specific symptoms of lung
     cancer.  What that means is that you could have
     symptoms, but they could have been caused by a
     number of different things and they cannot
     relate to lung cancer if you've got other
     potential causes.
          The symptoms are nonspecific.  Another way
     to say the same thing, you're going to see in
     the testimony sometimes reference to
     nonspecific symptoms, and this is what it
     means.  There aren't any specific symptoms for 3892
     lung cancer because lung cancer is not
     diagnosable from symptoms.  So that flows
     together.
          Symptoms are suspicious for lung cancer
     when they are chronic and persistent.  I'm not
     sure there's any dispute on that, but Dr. Abel
     really didn't address it.  Dr. Keller addressed
     it at some length.
          Excuse me.  Let me put that up there.
          If you have a symptom and it's caused by a
     tumor in the lung, usually that is coughing,
     could be hemoptysis, coughing up sputum that's
     blood-tinged, when whatever that tumor is, it's
     impinging upon the main bronchi, which is this
     trunk -- trunks.  That type of tumor that
     impinges on the main bronchi, typically
     centrally located, more often than not a
     squamous cell carcinoma, not the kind that
     Mrs. Sammarco had.
          Mrs. Sammarco's tumor was up in the
     periphery.  It's possible for a peripheral
     tumor to grow large enough to interfere with
     the bronchi, but her tumor at 3.0 to
     3.5 centimeters hadn't got to that stage.
          So size and location in the periphery 3893
     would suggest that you wouldn't expect symptoms
     from that tumor to create lung problems.  It's
     too far away, it's not big enough.  Shouldn't
     have any symptoms.
          And is that unusual?  Well, Dr. Keller --
     Dr. Keller sees lung patients every day.
     Dr. Abel, when he was practicing, had about 10
     or 15 percent of his patients -- lung cancer
     patients.
          And Dr. Keller was asked, and you saw the
     sign up -- the testimony up there, if somebody
     shows up at your office and they have a history
     of smoking and they have some weight loss and a
     couple of other symptoms were described, you
     would send her for an x-ray?
          And Dr. Keller said, "Whenever I get a
     referral of a patient, it's always for lung
     problems.  That's known before they show up.  I
     always send them for x-rays."
          So it's not anything specific to
     Mrs. Sammarco if somebody gets referred to him
     as a lung doctor, he sends them for a chest
     x-ray.
          And when Mrs. Sammarco was ultimately sent
     to a lung doctor, a pulmonologist, back in '97, 3894
     further testing was done to inquire about lung
     cancer.  That doctor wasn't called to testify
     either.
          Okay.  So Dr. Keller is discussing how you
     get symptoms from a tumor in the lung.  And
     there's not much dispute about that in the
     record.  And there's not much dispute that the
     tumor is located in an area where you would not
     expect symptoms.  And most peripheral tumors
     are found incidentally, not looking for them,
     but doing some other type of chest x-ray, and
     you'd find them by accident, because there's no
     symptoms that even would suggest there's an
     issue going on with the lungs.  That's
     Mrs. Sammarco's case.  That's Mrs. Sammarco's
     case.
          MR. SEXTON:  Mr. Kelly, you've used one
     hour.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you very much, Terry.
          Okay.  Move along here.
          So Dr. Abel in his deposition, back in
     2011 in his first deposition, talking about
     symptoms, here is was he was asked.
     "Question:  And my question was really more
symptoms.  You're not testifying here today that she 3895
had symptoms specific to her cancer before
diagnosis, correct?
     "Answer:  She had -- the cough is a nonspecific
symptom, so it is not specific to her lung cancer.
We cannot apportion the degree of a cough that is
attributable to one cause or another."
          And then his second deposition, after he
     had been developing his new theory about
     symptoms and not signs, this was his testimony.
     His answer.
     "Answer:  All the symptoms we have discussed
are nonspecific.
     "Question:  Meaning that they may be
attributable to cancer or they may not be, correct?
     "Answer:  That is correct.
     "Question:  So while it is possible that some
or all of the symptoms she had were related to her
cancer, it's also possible that they were not,
correct?
     "Answer:  The symptoms that she was having may
be related to the lung cancer, and the symptoms that
she was having individually or in the aggregate may
not be related to the lung cancer."
          Maybe, maybe not, doesn't move scales of
     justice at all.  And I would just make a quick 3896
     comment that it appears that the scales of
     justice Mr. Bass was using is broken.  It only
     goes in one direction.  Did you note that?
     Always the same way.  The scales of justice are
     not moved by maybe, maybe not.
          Okay.  So symptoms.  You can't diagnose
     from symptoms.  And here is what Dr. Abel
     testified at deposition, and then he came in
     and testified in court.  And here is what
     Mr. Quinlan asked.
     "Question:  Doctor, did Theresa Sammarco have
signs or symptoms diagnosable as lung cancer before
November 21, 1996?"
          Important question.  That's the question
     you're being presented with to see if there's
     any evidence in the record to support that.
     And here is Dr. Abel's answer.
     "Answer:  The answer is yes, but I'd like to
make a little qualification on it.  She had signs
and symptoms that would direct her physicians to do
the necessary tests so that the diagnosis would be
made.  Neither her symptoms existing alone nor the
presumed x-ray image existing alone is diagnosable
as lung cancer."
          Both of these bodies of knowledge would 3897
     lead to other immediate investigations which
     would provide a diagnosis of lung cancer at
     some later -- I'm adding this part.  At some
     later time.
          So as of November 21, 1996, the symptoms
     and the signs that were available then, that
     existed then, according to Dr. Abel, were not
     diagnosable as lung cancer.
          I'm going to skip ahead just little bit to
     Dr. Abel's constellation opinion.  He had an
     opinion that there was a constellation of
     symptoms, kind of like the question Mr. Scarola
     asked Dr. Keller, if someone showed up and said
     they had A, B, C, D, E, what would you do about
     that?
          Well, the records don't quite suggest that
     Mrs. Sammarco had all of those symptoms at one
     point in time.  Here's what the records
     suggest.  And I would note that both Dr. Burns
     and Dr. Keller thought Dr. Bates was a very
     good record-keeper.  It's only Dr. Abel who
     can't find support for his opinion and theory
     in the records who criticizes Dr. Bates.
          The first medical record in 1996 is in
     January.  January of '96, Mrs. Sammarco's 3898
     weight is 118.  She had a sore throat, glands
     in the back of the neck painful, her stomach
     was sore, achy pain lower back, dyspepsia,
     abdominal cramping, denies chest pain,
     shortness of breath, states under more stress,
     possibly precipitating elevated blood pressure,
     no clubbing noted.
          Those symptoms do not appear again when
     she's next seen in June.  The weight's now 112.
     Stomach problems, body aches, very fatigued.
     Thinks related to nerves.  Denies any weight
     loss.  Still stomach problems in June.
          The next treatment is in August, and
     that's with the ENT.  The ENT is the doctor who
     treats above the neck, and he treated for the
     hemoptysis.
          There's no testimony from the family that
     Mrs. Sammarco went to an ENT, but the records
     indicate she saw somebody who was a specialist
     above the neck and not down into the lungs for
     the hemoptysis.  That's Dr. Morris.
          The next record we have is September 26th.
     Her weight is now back up to 114.  And she sees
     the doctor for a painful cyst in the right ear,
     and really no other references to conditions. 3899
          And then that's where the class window
     ends, November 21.  There are no more treatment
     sessions with Dr. Bates before that.
          The next one is right after, a month
     later, December 30th, '96.  And this is the
     visit where her weight is at 112, she had
     bronchitis, and she's been coughing for a week,
     productive cough.
          The doctor notes, no chest pain or
     hemoptysis.  Dr. Abel agreed.  No shortness of
     breath, and the diagnosis is acute
     tracheobronchitis.  She is treated with
     antibiotics, cough medicine, cough suppressant,
     and for all indications, that acute condition
     cleared up.  It is not chronic and persistent.
          Because if it's lung cancer causing the
     condition, the tumor doesn't go away.  It
     doesn't leave and then come back.  If there is
     a condition, a symptom that's caused by the
     lung cancer, it continues until the lung cancer
     is treated.  That's undisputed in the record.
     Hardly a constellation of symptoms in 1996.
          I'm going to run through some of the
     symptoms.  You've heard all this from
     Dr. Keller, so I'm not going to spend a lot of 3900
     time on it.  But the productive cough is
     reported in the records, and you'll see these
     if you want to look through them, every year or
     so around the fall there's an acute bronchitis,
     tracheal bronchitis, that is treated with
     antibiotics.
          There's wheezing or shortness of breath,
     comes and goes with the bronchitis, nonspecific
     symptom, not sufficient to diagnosed lung
     cancer, and it comes and goes.  So it's not
     chronic and persistent.  And an example there
     is December 30th, denies any shortness of
     breath.
          Fatigue is another nonspecific symptom
     that comes and goes in the medical records.
     Isn't noted in the later medical records around
     time when it's closest to the actual diagnosis
     in December, no mention of fatigue.
          The weight loss, another nonspecific
     symptom, the doctors agree is not -- you can't
     diagnose lung cancer from weight loss.
          And Dr. Abel agreed that -- let's see if I
     have a clip on this.
          Okay.  Well, this is Dr. Abel agreeing
     that there's no indication of hemoptysis in 3901
     Dr. Bates' records.  Even though there's a
     reference on December 30th to "no chest pain,
     hemoptysis," Dr. Bates reads it same way
     Dr. Keller does, "no chest pain or hemoptysis
     noted."
          Okay.  And this is with respect to the
     weight loss.
     "Question:  Okay.  And for the entire eight or
nine years before '98, her weight fluctuated from,
one, a high of about 118, to a low of about 109,
correct?
     "Answer:  That's correct.
     "Question:  Always in the area of about 112 to
114 --
     "Answer:  Correct.
     "Question:  -- on average, right?
     "Answer:  Yes."
          And that's what her weight fluctuated
     between in 1996.  It started out at a high of
     118, but the average is between 112 and 114 for
     the balance of the year.
          Not really any indication of a weight
     loss.  And then there's a reference to
     "clubbing," which Dr. Abel and Dr. Keller is
     agree is a nonspecific symptom from which you 3902
     cannot diagnose lung cancer.
          And I have a timeline here.  Let me walk
     you through it.  Because there was a question
     about whether or not James, the son who's the
     EMT and the paramedic, observed clubbing, and
     when he did.  And here is the question he was
     asked at trial:
     "Question:  Okay.  Do you know how far back in
the '90s?"
          And here's James' testimony:
     "Answer:  I would say early on, you know, I
could see that she had clubbing of the fingers right
at fingertips.  They were starting to get a little
bit fatter and stuff like that.  And, again, she
had, you know, poor circulation.  She had a delayed
cap refill.  And, you know, she had some things that
would attribute to that."
          And so we look in the medical records and
     we see that there are cardiovascular problems
     dating into the late 1980s, all the way through
     the diagnosis of lung cancer.
          There's abdominal problems, you saw some
     of them in '96 and an abdominal aneurysm, and
     that goes all the way through the diagnosis for
     lung cancer. 3903
          And those conditions are potential causes
     of clubbing.  And we see that the clubbing is
     present, it's identified as not being there, it
     pops up again, it's not there again, and on and
     on.
          It is not a persistent or chronic
     condition from which you would look to a tumor
     in the lung to explain when it begins in the
     early '90s.
          Okay.  Almost done with the manifestation
     issue and then, Your Honor, a short break?
          THE COURT:  (Nods.)
          MR. KELLY:  "Were there symptoms before
     November 21, '96, from which lung cancer could
     be diagnosed?  Was the tumor big enough to
     cause symptoms before November 21, 96?"
          Don't know.  Dr. Abel didn't provide the
     evidence you need to make that determination.
          "Was the tumor in the right location in
     the lung to cause symptoms before November 21,
     '96?"
          No.  Dr. Keller's the only one who
     addressed that issue, and he explained why that
     is.
          "Were any of the symptoms specific to lung 3904
     cancer?"
          No, both doctors agree you can't diagnose
     lung cancer from those symptoms.
          "Were any of them chronic or persistent so
     that you would suspect a lung cancer being the
     cause?"
          No, they are all acute, temporary,
     intermittent.
          "Could lung cancer be diagnosed from those
     symptoms?"
          Both experts agree, no.
          Your Honor, now is a good time.
          Thank you very much.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Hello again.  I'm going to talk about a
     new topic.  When I'm almost all done I'm going
     to go through the verdict form to show you
     where these points come up, but the verdict
     form is a little different than the
     instructions.
          I'll kind of follow the instructions, but
     I'll clear that up at end to indicate where
     you're going to find these issues on the
     verdict form.
          So, the next issue that you may encounter
     is whether or not Mrs. Sammarco was addicted.
     And as I told you in opening statement, I'm
     going to tell you now, you won't find any
www.phippsreporting.com
888 811-3408

     definition of "addiction" in the legal
     instructions that are your guidepost for
     deciding this case.
          So you heard lots and lots of definitions
     of addiction, dating back to the 1950s, all the
     way up to the present time, and I don't know
     now, I didn't know in opening statement, which
     definition you're going to pick.
          You may pick the one that Dr. Cummings
     sometimes used, that if you smoke every day,
     regardless of how much you smoke, you're
     addicted.  I don't know if that's the one
     you're going to choose.  So, whichever one you
     choose over the entire period of time there are
     addiction definitions, from the 1950s to the
     1990s, if the facts fit Mrs. Sammarco -- from
     Mrs. Sammarco, fit that definition, then you'll
     deal with that appropriately.  I'm sure you
     will.
          And then that definition gets transferred
     over to later questions.  You'll see how that
     works in the verdict form.
          But there is one thing I want to talk
     about, and that's hindsight.  Everything we do
     today, looking back, is hindsight.  And as we 3907
     look back 50, 60 or more years, we have to
     remember that we can't take today's knowledge,
     and today's attitudes, and today's beliefs back
     with us to understand what was going on at that
     point in time in the past.  We talked about
     that, I think, in jury selection.
          You'll see in the records, the documents,
     references to addiction from time to time in
     documents or in statements, and to understand
     the context or the meaning of that term in that
     document or statement, you have to remember the
     time in which it took place.
          I've got a couple of examples to show you,
     to let you know what I'm talking about here.
          So there's a document that you were shown
     in the closing argument that's from 1959.  And
     it uses the word on the next page "addiction."
     And this one document is the basis for the
     claim in this case that Philip Morris, as far
     back as 1959, knew cigarette smoking was
     addicting, as that term is used in later years.
          So I wanted to show you, for example, that
     the memo writer is indicating earlier this
     year -- "early this year, I was assigned the
     task of reading and studying the reports now on 3908
     which pertain to the subject of psychological
     research.  These were the Chicago Tribune
     report and the series of Roper reports and such
     other reports as came to my attention."
          You know from the other documents that
     Roper reports are surveys of people, normal,
     everyday, average people.  And we know back in
     the '50s and in the '40s and in the '30s, that
     "addiction" and "habit" were defined the same
     way.  Sometimes they defined each other.  And
     it was common, common at that time --
     Dr. Cummings agreed that it was common at that
     time for the term "addiction" and "habit" to be
     interchangeable, especially when talking about
     whether or not cigarette smoking is hard to
     quit.
          The other reference that you were just
     shown in closing argument was the 1994
     congressional testimony, and it's alleged that
     that testimony was false because the Surgeon
     General had changed the definition of
     "addiction" in '88.
          If you listen carefully to that clip, you
     hear the executive trying to explain to the
     Congressmen that "cigarette and nicotine does 3909
     not meet the classic definition of addiction.
     It does not cause intoxication" -- and he is
     cut off.
          You know from the testimony of
     Dr. Cummings that from 1964 to 1988, the
     definition the Surgeon General used had
     addiction requiring intoxication.  That's why
     cigarettes, according to the Surgeon General
     until he changed the definition, were not
     considered addicting.  They were considered
     habit-forming.
          So that's the context in which the
     testimony's given in '94.  You can't assess it
     with today's sensibilities and understanding.
     You've got to go back there in time and
     recognize that even Dr. Cummings testified that
     when the Surgeon General changed the
     definition -- definition in 1988, respected
     authorities in addiction outside the industry
     objected to it.  And you may or may not
     remember that at that time, the psychiatric
     association was using dependence because the
     term "addiction" was being misused.
          The context is very, very important in
     understanding the documents.  You recall that 3910
     regardless of the definition, the basic
     character of tobacco use hasn't changed since
     1492 when it was reported that use of tobacco
     was hard to quit by Columbus' scrivener.
     Throughout the 1900s -- there's Mark Twain as
     well.  I won't do that one again.
          Throughout the 1900s, there's references
     to nicotine fits.  Nicotine fiend.  Those are
     references to the fact that it was well-known
     as long as tobacco's been used that the
     nicotine in the tobacco can be hard to quit.
     Whether you call it addiction or habit or
     dependence or whatever, that fact has never
     been disputed.  It's commonly known and given
     those kinds of terms to reflect everybody knows
     it, because when you say that guy's a nicotine
     fiend, everybody knows what you mean.  He is
     using tobacco and he's finding it hard to quit.
     That goes back to the early 1900s.  No secret
     there.
          And 60 million smokers who fall under the
     definition of "addiction" that Dr. Cummings
     could use have quit smoking.  The brain changes
     that you were told about, those smokers who
     quit and quit for good all had those same brain 3911
     changes.  That's the physiology of our bodies.
     Those brain changes occur.  It doesn't prevent
     a smoker from quitting.  All those millions and
     millions of smokers who quit had those brain
     changes, and quit.
          Those brain changes occur when other
     substances that fall under the broad definition
     of "addiction" are considered, like coffee.
     Coffee has the same brain changes.  Chocolate
     has the same brain changes.  Exercise will have
     the same kinds of release of endorphins.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Your Honor, I'm sorry, but
     that's entirely outside the evidence.  There is
     no evidence of brain changes from chocolate or
     any other substance.
          MR. KELLY:  Yes, there is.  This is
     Dr. Cummings' testimony.
          THE COURT:  I reminded the jury that what
     the lawyers say is not evidence, and you are to
     recollect the evidence on your own.
          MR. KELLY:  Okay.  But all of those brain
     changes occur with all of those other
     substances as well.
          Let me move to another issue that you may
     find on the verdict form, and that is whether 3912
     an addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of
     Mrs. Sammarco's lung cancer and death.  And
     legal cause is the central issue -- instruction
     on that issue.
          I'm going to take you back, then, for a
     moment to our earlier discussion of legal
     cause, back to Mr. Scarola and Mr. Bass' car
     accident in the intersection, where you'll
     recall Mr. Bass is waiting at the intersection,
     and along comes Mr. Scarola, and lawfully
     driving, not at an excessive speed, comes into
     the intersection, Mr. Bass heads across, they
     collide.  There is some damage to the car, and
     Mr. Bass wants Mr. Scarola to pay for the
     damage to the car.
          And the question of whether or not
     Mr. Scarola or Mr. Bass is responsible for the
     damage to the car is the legal cause question.
     There's no issue that the cause of the damage
     is the car crash.  Just like there's no issue
     in this case that the cause of the cancer is
     the cigarette smoking.
          But what the legal cause is, is dependent
     on circumstances beyond the collision.  Who had
     the red light, who had the green light, who had 3913
     the last clear chance, what did that
     intersection look like, was there clear vision.
     Lots of issues before you can figure out
     whether or not Mr. Scarola should pay Mr. Bass
     for the damage to the car.
          And the same is true with respect to the
     legal cause connection between -- I will take
     Mr. Bass' car off the screen -- between
     cigarette smoking leading to lung cancer, and
     addiction.
          The way that the plaintiff argued it to
     you was that the only thing, the only thing
     that causes somebody to smoke is addiction.
     You've got to look at Mrs. Sammarco's life and
     ask yourself what were the factors in her life
     that contributed to her smoking, her continuing
     to smoke, the extent to which she quit, and the
     extent to which she did not quit, what factors
     influenced her decisions.
          No question but that there's an admission
     by the plaintiffs that Mrs. Sammarco was -- I'm
     sorry, by the plaintiff, Mr. Sammarco, that his
     wife was at fault for not quitting sooner.  And
     it, by reason of that fault, caused in part her
     injury and death. 3914
          So there's something else at work here
     other than addiction.  And you find it in the
     evidence related to Mrs. Sammarco.  Because you
     have to look at her individual situation to
     determine what factors influenced her and the
     role, if any, substantial role addiction
     played.
          Excuse me for a second.  Counsel?
     Counsel?
          I think it's fair to say that the evidence
     reflects that Mrs. Sammarco's family, the
     Martinelli family, had a substantial influence
     on her choices to smoke growing up and in her
     adult life.  You'll remember this is her dad
     james Martinelli, that's her mom, Edith
     Martinelli, that's her uncle, and family
     gathered around the Sammarco dining room table
     in a very typical spontaneous photograph just
     catching them in a normal day, or a normal
     evening.  And that's the very fun and --
     fun-loving group.
          You recall the relationship between
     Mrs. Sammarco and her brother was one which
     they were very, very close, a lot of teasing
     going on.  It was a very fun-loving family, and 3915
     I think the photograph captures that in a way
     that you can read a lot into the picture.
          So these are some of the factors that
     influenced Mrs. Sammarco's smoking.  The
     Martinelli family were heavy smokers
     throughout.  Cigarette smoking was a part of
     the social fabric of the Martinelli/Sammarco
     household while the Martinellis were there.
          There was a kind of ritual that
     Mrs. Sammarco had with her mom in the morning
     where they would come down and before anybody
     else in the house got up, they'd share a cup of
     coffee and a cigarette together for some
     20-plus years.
          We know that addiction did not cause
     Mrs. Sammarco to start smoking.  We don't have
     any evidence of the circumstances under which
     she started or what brand she started smoking.
          We know from the plaintiff's opening
     statement that addicted smokers can quit and
     have the responsibility to stop.  And we have
     the question that really hasn't been answered:
     When was it that Mrs. Sammarco could have quit
     that forms the basis for the plaintiff's
     admission that she could have quit? 3916
          There isn't any indication that she could
     not have quit, as the plaintiffs admit earlier
     in time when, like millions of other smokers,
     information about the dangers of smoking became
     widespread and well-known.
          Remember that mountainous chart that
     Dr. Cummings used.  It's about the mid-1960s
     where the peak occurs, and then beginning in
     about 1969, 1970 when the new warnings went on
     the cigarette packs that there begins a steady,
     steady, decline that's continued to this day.
          We know that Mrs. Sammarco was aware of
     the dangers of smoking from a variety of
     sources.  There were the pack warnings, of
     course, beginning in 1966, improved in 1970.
          There's the Martinelli family experience.
     There's her doctors discussing with her every
     time she goes to see them the dangers of
     smoking.  And that's testified to by
     Mr. Sammarco.  All the way back to 1957.
          We have the family members, her sons and
     her husband and her daughter, Edith, and the
     paper she provided back in fourth or fifth
     grade, all of those give you some indication of
     the factors and the circumstances in which 3917
     Mrs. Sammarco is smoking.
          And we know this much about Mrs. Sammarco
     from the evidence.  I took these notes from the
     family talking about Mrs. Sammarco.  Character
     was strong-willed, intelligent, a strict
     disciplinarian, formidable, tenacious, and
     meticulous.
          Mrs. Sammarco never threw away her
     ashtrays or lighter or cigarettes.  Addiction
     did not prevent Mrs. Sammarco from cutting
     back.  You'll see some -- I'll show it to you
     in a second -- in a little bit, some of the
     testimony about cutting back, that according to
     Dr. Cummings, once you're addicted, you have to
     maintain a level of nicotine coming into your
     system to satisfy the receptors in your brain.
     That's Dr. Cummings' view of the world, of
     nicotine.
          And so no matter if you smoke the same
     cigarette or you smoke different cigarettes,
     you always get that same amount -- you need the
     same amount of nicotine if you're addicted.
          Mrs. Sammarco does not fit that profile.
     Does not fit that profile.  The profile
     Mrs. Sammarco fits is she is cutting back on 3918
     her smoking the longer she smokes after her
     mother is out of the house and she's the only
     other smoker in the house.  Mrs. Sammarco is
     not fitting the profile that's painted by
     Dr. Cummings.
          And I think there's a reason for that.
     Let me suggest this to you.  Because I was
     thinking about Dr. Cummings and his perspective
     that he brings to his testimony, and makes no
     bones about it, he is an advocate against
     tobacco companies and he is biased against
     tobacco companies.  He would be the first to
     tell you that, and I don't begrudge him for a
     moment that opinion, those viewpoints.  It's
     America, he is entitled to them.  But you get
     to take those biases into consideration when
     you consider his testimony.
          Here is another thing to think about, let
     me suggest to you.  Dr. Cummings spent 30 years
     in a smoking cessation clinic.  He saw those
     smokers who could not quit on their own.  So he
     saw the smokers who did not quit what they say,
     cold turkey.  We know from the records in
     evidence -- the testimony in evidence, I should
     say, that 95 percent, virtually all of smokers 3919
     who quit, quit cold turkey.
          So Dr. Cummings' view of the smoking
     population is that slice of the smoking
     population who has not quit cold turkey.  They
     are the ones who need assistance.  And that's
     who he's seeing.  That's who he's telling you
     about when he talks about the smokers that he
     sees.
          Mrs. Sammarco isn't part of that small
     population.  She did not need assistance to
     quit when she decided to quit.  Motivation is
     the most important thing.  When she had it, she
     quit.  So the population that Dr. Cummings is
     talking about is not Mrs. Sammarco.
          What do the witnesses say?  Dr. Cummings
     said, "Smokers have many reasons for smoking.
     Smokers often begin smoking because their
     families and friends are smokers."
          Dr. Cummings says, "Smoking has behavioral
     components and becomes a strong habit for
     smokers.  It's not just the physical addiction.
     There are behaviors, and the individual
     alone -- that the individual alone is in
     control of."
          Dr. Burns said, "Addiction did not prevent 3920
     Mrs. Sammarco from quitting."  He said -- that
     is, Dr. Burns said, "Addicted smokers are
     responsible for their smoking behavior
     including Mrs. Sammarco."
          Tens of millions of addicted smokers quit
     for good, and on the average, about three weeks
     is what it takes for the physical withdrawal
     symptoms to go away.
          And on the subject of motivation,
     Dr. Cummings said this:  "If a smoker does not
     want to quit, he or she won't stop smoking."
          Motivation is such an important factor.
          Now, there is dispute in the records, the
     testimony, about how often Mrs. Sammarco
     actually tried to quit by stopping.  Seems to
     be a lot of testimony that Mrs. Sammarco cut
     back, like at Lent, but did not stop.  Never
     threw her cigarettes away.
          But some of her testimony -- well, the
     family testimony about hypnosis and a patch and
     gum, the details, as you look back in your
     notes, the details of those quit attempts are
     very, very thin.
          For example, when was the gum attempted?
     Was it even nicotine gum?  When was a patch 3921
     obtained?  From whom?  For how long?
          There are no details about that at all.
          When was hypnosis and what kind of
     hypnosis and what was that about?  Nobody has
     any details about those quit attempts at all.
          But Mr. Sammarco, who had the best vantage
     point of all, was asked in trial here:
     "Question:  Okay.  Other than those two
attempts, the hypnosis and Lenten quit, do you
recall any other occasion when she made a concerted
effort to quit for a period of time?"
          Mr. Sammarco's answer.  This is
     Mr. Sammarco, Senior.
     "Answer:  She never actually stopped smoking.
     "Question:  Okay.
     "Answer:  And like she would try to cut back if
anything.  That was like the only attempts that I
would say that she tried.
     "Question:  Okay."
          And this is the last answer.
     "Answer:  That's all it was.  She tried to cut
back."
          This is a very intelligent, strong-willed,
     organized, and meticulous woman.  She had a
     plan for running that household.  She had a 3922
     plan of scheduled meals that were the same
     every week, same great-sounding breakfast on
     the weekend.  Did not have a plan to quit.
          Dr. Cummings tells us that you need a plan
     if you intend to quit, if you want to be
     successful in quitting.  She had a plan to cut
     back and not quit.
          And we don't have to guess as to what
     reason there was for her to continue smoking
     because we have it in the record from her son
     John that "She told me that she believed that
     it wouldn't happen to her."  That she would see
     an elderly person smoking and point to them and
     say, "See, they're alive.  It doesn't bother
     them."
          She didn't believe it would happen to her.
     With that belief, she never had the motivation
     sufficient to quit.  Cut back, yes.  Control
     her risk by doing so, yes.  That's the family's
     testimony.
          There's a claim that she was getting, that
     is, Mrs. Sammarco was getting mixed messages
     from Philip Morris.  The evidence is that for
     30 years, in the late 1960s through the late
     1990s, the loudest mixed message Mrs. Sammarco 3923
     was getting was from her husband, who would
     tell her not to smoke, and then let her know,
     "I'm going out to the Indian reservation to
     pick up your weekly carton of cigarettes, I'll
     be right back."
          There isn't a stronger mixed message.  If
     you want to look for something that the
     plaintiffs are calling cognitive dissidence, I
     think it just means a mixed message, that's
     what the evidence suggests.
          Another disputed issue, did Mrs. Sammarco
     actually enjoy smoking?  The family didn't
     think so, they certainly didn't enjoy her
     smoking, but did Mrs. Sammarco enjoy smoking?
          And so we offered you the testimony of her
     niece, Edith Martinelli, a smoker herself, who
     observed Mrs. Sammarco enjoyed smoking.  Those
     two smoked together on a pretty regular basis.
     She would know.
          Well, the bottom line on whether or not
     it's just addiction that causes someone to
     smoke or whether there are lots of other
     factors in somebody's life, choices they make
     for reasons completely separate and apart from
     a daily dosage of nicotine, you can consider 3924
     all the evidence in the case, because the
     plaintiffs agree that Mrs. Sammarco is at fault
     in part for not quitting sooner.
          And you take that admission and you
     wonder, what does that mean?  It means she
     could have quit sooner.  We'd all agree with
     that.  Why didn't she?  They want to say it's
     addiction, but she gave us the answer.  She
     didn't mention addiction.  She didn't mention
     it's too hard to quit.  She said she didn't
     think it was going to happen to her.
          Let me move on then to another issue that
     you may address in your deliberations, and that
     is related to findings of fact.  And I just
     want to make a couple of points.  They are in
     the instructions, you will see them there, but
     the findings of fact have no application for
     all the issues we just finished talking about.
          The findings of fact do not establish any
     liability with respect to Mrs. Sammarco.
     You're not going to find Mrs. Sammarco's name
     in the findings of fact at all.  It remains the
     plaintiff's burden of proof to connect up those
     findings of fact to Mrs. Sammarco.
          So the next issue you may address is 3925
     comparative apportionment.  There's really no
     new evidence to consider.  It's given all of
     the evidence we've just discussed about the
     family and Mrs. Sammarco's reasons for the
     choices she made, accepting that the plaintiffs
     admit Mrs. Sammarco is at fault but not willing
     to accept 100 percent, what part, if any, is
     assigned -- should be assigned to
     Philip Morris, consider this evidence before
     you.
          It's lawful to manufacture and sell
     cigarettes.  All of the cigarettes
     Philip Morris sold -- manufactured and sold
     from '66 through the end of Mrs. Sammarco's
     smoking had the appropriate required warning
     label on them.
          That Mrs. Sammarco never heard any
     statement from Philip Morris, or any tobacco
     company for that matter, that influenced her to
     smoke.  Philip Morris made and sold and
     Mr. Sammarco bought and Mrs. Sammarco smoked
     cigarettes that were lawful to make, sell, buy,
     and smoke.
          The plaintiff and Philip Morris agree that
     Mrs. Sammarco could have quit in time to avoid 3926
     her cancer, but according to the family's
     testimony, she didn't think it would happen to
     her, and she continued smoking, albeit cutting
     back.
          So it's our position, given all of that
     testimony, Mrs. Sammarco is not just partly
     responsible for her choices and her decisions,
     she is 100 percent responsible for the choices
     and decisions she made with full knowledge of
     the risks.
          There is another issue you may get to in
     the verdict form, and it relates to
     Mrs. Sammarco's decisions after May 1982.  I'll
     write that down here.  Another date that's
     important for consideration of the evidence.
          There is a claim in the case that
     Mrs. Sammarco by May of 1982 was unaware of the
     dangers of smoking and relied on some omission
     or concealment of information of which she
     wasn't aware in her smoking decisions after
     1982.
          Kind of a complicated issue, lots of
     elements the plaintiff has to prove.  They are
     all in the instructions.  But let me just talk
     about the evidence I think is going to help you 3927
     answer this question on the verdict form.
          By 1982, Mrs. Sammarco knew entirely about
     the dangers of smoking from a number of
     sources.  There is no way in this record that
     anybody could suggest that Mrs. Sammarco was
     unaware of the dangers of smoking.  When the
     plaintiffs admit that she should have and could
     have quit, they are essentially admitting she
     knew the dangers of smoking.
          But for this claim, this is a little
     different claim.  It's got a couple of
     different features to it.  All the other claims
     for compensatory damages, if there's a
     reduction for comparative fault, the award is
     reduced.  But this one, the admission of fault
     that might lead to comparative fault
     apportionment, if you apportion it instead of
     giving 100 percent, doesn't apply to this
     claim.  It's one of the complicated features of
     this claim.
          But the evidence, the facts the plaintiffs
     have the burden to establish are that
     Mrs. Sammarco by 1982 didn't know the dangers
     of smoking.  The evidence will be, has been,
     when you get into the jury room, this is 3928
     evidence:  The family told her in no uncertain
     terms that Lights were no safer than other
     cigarettes.  Her family experience, it couldn't
     be more personal, told her about the dangers of
     smoking.  All of her doctors told her.  The
     pack warnings were present.
          There is no evidence that Mrs. Sammarco
     saw, read, heard, and relied upon any
     statements from Philip Morris.  There's no
     print or billboard ads for Marlboro Lights in
     evidence that would suggest there's anything on
     there that's inappropriate in any way.
          By the time Marlboro Lights came out,
     there weren't any commercials on television
     anymore for cigarettes.  Those went off the air
     in '71.  Marlboro Lights came into the market
     after that.
          So all this information you saw back in
     the '30s and '40s and '50s, by the time we get
     to 1971, and certainly by '82, there are no ads
     on TV or the radio.  Every print ad has the
     required warning on it.  All of that past
     history doesn't stick around, new history comes
     into being in the '70s and the '80s.  This is
     the time period you're referencing, '82. 3929
          The only ads -- the only ads that
     referenced lower-tar cigarettes being
     potentially safer for the smoker that are in
     evidence are those from the public health
     community.
          You'll remember the ad on the left, "Bad
     is better than worse," with the FTC tar and
     nicotine ratings at the bottom.  This was put
     out by the public health community, the
     Department of HEW put that out.
          The position of the public health
     community from 1966 through 1998, this is
     undisputed in the record, was that if you don't
     smoke, don't start.  If you do smoke, you
     should quit.  But, if you don't quit, you
     should switch to a lower-tar cigarette.
          That's the position of the public health
     community.  And they put out publications,
     advertisements, like the two you're seeing
     here, that said exactly that.
          No Marlboro Lights commercials or ads, but
     the public health community was saying that.
          By 1982, the warnings had been on the
     packs for 16 years.  By 1982, it had been 25
     years since her doctors began warning 3930
     Mrs. Sammarco about the dangers of smoking.  It
     had been about ten years since her father died
     of emphysema from smoking, and her mother had
     passed away in 1980.
          Since the 1960s, her children had been
     telling her in no uncertain terms what the
     dangers of smoking were.  John Junior pointed
     out the pack warnings.  John Junior told his
     mom, he said, in plain words, that smoking
     would kill her if she didn't quit.
          James said the same thing, maybe even more
     strongly, given his background as an EMT and
     paramedic.
          And, of course, Edith had been telling her
     mom that in different ways since the fourth
     grade.
          But there's other evidence in the record
     about 1982.  Dr. Burns testified, plaintiff's
     expert, that by 1981, 95 percent of all smokers
     knew that cigarette smoking causes cancer.
     That's Dr. Burns.  By 1981, 95 percent knew
     that smoking caused cancer.  In fact, he said,
     "At that time more people knew that smoking
     caused cancer than knew the name of the
     President." 3931
          The plaintiff has the burden to establish
     that Mrs. Sammarco, not some other theoretical
     smoker, but Mrs. Sammarco was unaware of the
     dangers of smoking by 1982.
          And then there's additional elements that
     have to be proved on this claim that
     Mrs. Sammarco saw, heard, or read some
     statement through some means that got to her
     from the tobacco industry that didn't tell her
     what she needed to know.  I told you it's
     complicated.
          There wasn't anything she needed to know
     in the first place.  There's no evidence that
     some statement from the tobacco company made
     its way directly or indirectly to
     Mrs. Sammarco.  There's just no record of that
     in the evidence from any of the family members.
          Plaintiff's counsel admitted --
     plaintiff's counsel indicated, let me say it
     that way, indicated in opening statement that
     there was not going to be any evidence that
     Mrs. Sammarco saw any particular ad or company
     statement, and, of course, Dr. Cummings, in his
     pretrial conversations with Mr. Scarola --
     there's nothing wrong with having a 3932
     conversation with your witness -- but,
     remember, that Dr. Cummings was the witness who
     sometimes asked himself his own questions,
     sometimes led the attorney, and sometimes, as
     in this email, gives legal advice to the
     lawyers about how to get evidence into trial.
          This gives you some indication of the
     level of bias that Dr. Cummings has toward his
     activity as an expert witness for which he is
     paid very handsomely.
          So he writes:  "In other words, the
     wallpaper argument that everyone was exposed is
     not good enough by itself.  It would be useful
     to comb the record to see that the plaintiff
     was directly exposed to specific forms of
     marketing and PR.  For example, family members
     who recall seeing spokespeople on TV shows, or
     recalling reading newspaper articles or
     magazine articles where the industry denied the
     health risks of smoking," are suggested.
          There were no such references in the
     evidence.  There's no indication that any
     industry statement, through some circuitous
     route, gets to Mrs. Sammarco.
          It doesn't have to get to her directly. 3933
     It can get to her indirectly.  But it has to
     get to her to prove what they -- what the
     plaintiff has to prove on this claim.
          And there's no evidence, even when they
     got the suggestion from Dr. Cummings as to what
     to look for, no evidence that any industry
     statement ever got, directly or indirectly, to
     Mrs. Sammarco.
          MR. SEXTON:  That's two hours, Frank.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you, Terry.
          All right.  I'm more than halfway.
          Before I move on to the next point.  There
     were admissions from Dr. Cummings on the stand
     that he -- he was on for a long time -- you may
     not remember all the admissions.  Let me cover
     just a couple.
          Dr. Cummings agreed that Philip Morris
     never made a public statement, out in the
     public, that might somehow get to
     Mrs. Sammarco.  PM never made a public
     statement that lower-tar cigarettes were safer.
     PM never made a public statement that lower-tar
     cigarettes were less addicting.  PM never made
     a public statement that lower-tar cigarettes
     were easier to quit, or would help smokers 3934
     quit.
          Dr. Cummings admitted that from the late
     '60s through 1998, the public health community
     recommended that people switch to lower-tar
     cigarettes.  And there's been a suggestion that
     there is -- the tobacco industry promoting
     low-tar cigarettes and the public health
     community saying, don't do that.
          For this period of time, 1966 through
     1998, which is the relevant period of time when
     the conduct of the companies would affect
     Mrs. Sammarco, the public health authorities,
     the public health community, the public health
     scientists, the Surgeon General in his reports
     or her reports, for that period of time, had
     the view, based on the science and epidemiology
     available at that time, that lower-tar
     cigarettes were resulting in a reduction of
     injury and death to those smokers who quit for
     that entire period of time.
          The last piece of evidence that you have
     on that is from 1996, Dr. Samet's article in
     the NCI publication, reporting that he has
     reviewed all of the population studies, the
     epidemiology, up to that point in time.  And 3935
     what the Surgeon General said in 1981, that
     lower-tar cigarettes are producing less risk is
     true today, in 1996.  Not saying it's true now,
     please don't misunderstand me.  I'm trying to
     keep you in the context that's the basis for
     the claim in this case.  And that's related to
     Mrs. Sammarco.  And that's the testimony.
          The companies were not outliers, doing
     something nobody else recommended.  The public
     health community recommended that activity for
     a substantial period of time, throughout the
     entire time Mrs. Sammarco was smoking.
          MR. SEXTON:  You have about 25 minutes.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you.
          Kind of a summary of this claim.  They say
     it's kind of complicated, the plaintiff has a
     lot to prove.  But questions, in the evidence,
     you may find yourself answering:  "By 1982 was
     Mrs. Sammarco unaware of the dangers of
     smoking?"
          No way, under this record, can that be
     answered yes.  That is clearly, here in this
     record, by 1982, no.
          "After 1982, did Mrs. Sammarco hear, see
     or read and rely upon any statements from 3936
     industry concealing the dangers of smoking?"
          There's no evidence that she heard
     anything, let alone relied upon information.
     There's just no connection between what the
     evidence is that you have seen and
     Mrs. Sammarco on this concealment claim.
          And, lastly:  "Was any such statement a
     legal cause of her lung cancer?"  Meaning, was
     there something she was unaware of, that she
     didn't have information on, that was kept from
     her, had she known it, she would have stopped
     smoking soon enough to avoid lung cancer."
          So when, after 1982, after having smoked
     for 25 years or so, would Mrs. Sammarco have to
     quit smoking, had she known something she
     didn't already know, that was kept from her by
     the cigarette companies, to avoid her illness.
          The plaintiff has to prove all that.
     There's no evidence as to when, if she had quit
     smoking, she would have avoided her lung cancer
     and death.  That's just not in the record.
     There's no proof of the causation element on
     this claim; that's a medical question.  There's
     just no evidence that if she quit sometime
     after 1982, she would have avoided her lung 3937
     cancer.  Not in the record.
          Now, I talked a little bit about Dr. Burns
     and Dr. Cummings.  There is an additional claim
     in the case that you may get to, if you get
     this far in the case and have to address
     another question, and that question relates to
     Mr. Sammarco's claim to punish Philip Morris
     for intentionally engaging in the conduct
     that's alleged in this claim after 1982.
          And on that claim -- now, this is a
     separate -- this is a claim for punishment
     damages, not compensatory damages.  This is --
     whatever you decide for compensatory damages,
     if you get that far -- and by discussing it, I
     don't suggest for a moment that you should get
     that far -- but there's a difference between
     compensatory and punitive damages.  And
     punitive damages are for more money to the
     individual, not for a class, not for a group,
     the individual --
          MR. SCAROLA:  Pardon me, Your Honor,
     excuse me.
          That's an entirely improper argument.
     There is no evidence with respect to what
     happens to punitive damages or where they go; 3938
     and it is an improper consideration.  I ask the
     court to instruct the jury to disregard it, as
     a matter of law.
          MR. KELLY:  Can I be heard on that, Your
     Honor?
          THE COURT:  I will be providing the jury
     instructions they need to know regarding the
     punitive damages in this case.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          So it's like an entirely different type of
     claim, then, a compensatory damage claim; and
     it requires different rules of law.
          So, if you get this far on the verdict
     form you'll see that for this claim of
     intentionally attempting to harm individuals,
     through this means, the evidence has to be
     clear and convincing.  Not just the tip of the
     scales, as Mr. Bass has been referring to, but
     clear and convincing.  A whole new standard
     entirely.  And you're not entitled to use the
     findings of fact, which are the basis for this
     claim.
          It gets more and more complicated, I know.
     But it's in the instructions.  And 3939
     instructions say that for the punitive claim,
     which is based on a concealment claim, the
     findings of fact, if you get this far, can't be
     used to decide the punitive damage claim.
          So I think when you get that far and you
     read those instructions you're going to see
     that this claim wasn't even supported with the
     findings.  So without the findings, this claim
     falls completely apart, because there's no
     reliance, there's no causation, and this is the
     only claim for which punitive damages are even
     being considered.  So, that's your focus; the
     clear and convincing standard will not be met.
          In 1982, Mrs. Sammarco, at some point, is
     smoking lower-tar cigarettes.  And so for this
     claim that the company should be punished for
     selling low-tar cigarettes, I would like to
     take a few moments with you and just go over
     the evidence that indicates that there's
     nothing wrong, during this period of time, for
     manufacturing and selling lower-tar cigarettes
     with the required warning.
          We've already talked about from 1966
     through 1998, the scientific evidence
     demonstrated that lower-tar cigarettes were 3940
     less dangerous than higher-tar cigarettes.
     We've already talked about '66 to '98, the
     public health authorities recommending
     lower-tar cigarettes.  That they all have the
     same warnings, lower-tar cigarettes didn't have
     any other warning different from higher-tar
     cigarettes.
          But there's a claim that -- something
     called "compensation" occurs when somebody
     switches from a higher-tar cigarette to a
     lower-tar cigarette, and that nobody knew about
     that except somebody inside the cigarette
     company.
          Well, we know the Surgeon General knew
     about it, because he put it in the Surgeon
     General's Report.  But more than that, more
     than that, there's our standard:  "'Clear and
     convincing evidence' differs from the 'greater
     weight of the evidence' in that it is more
     compelling and persuasive."  And "The findings
     may not be considered when determining whether
     punitive damages may be warranted against
     Philip Morris USA. Inc."
          Okay.  In 1976 -- so before 1982 -- in
     1976, Consumer Reports publishes an article 3941
     that's all about nicotine, low tar and
     compensation.  The very subject the plaintiffs
     are claiming was hidden from the public health
     community is published in that Consumer Reports
     in '76, with citations to the public health
     community.
          Now, I'm going to read in some of the
     those compensation -- some of the compensation
     article so can you see everything the
     plaintiffs are claiming wasn't known by the
     scientific community was out there in the
     general public, with citations from the
     scientific community.
          "But nicotine intake is also increased by
     other adjustments in smoking patterns.  Since
     1968, reports in the Lancet, Nature, and the
     British Medical Journal have described several
     such adjustments.
          "Smokers often smoke a low-nicotine
     cigarette to a shorter butt.  This alteration
     in smoking pattern is particularly significant
     because the last few puffs contain much more
     tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide than the
     early puffs.
          "Some smokers also increase the size of 3942
     each puff, thus increasing the nicotine dose
     per puff."  Some shorten the interval between
     puffs, thus increasing the dose per minute.
          "There are also other ways to
     compensate" -- they use the same term -- "for a
     drop in nicotine yield by drawing the smoker --
     I'm sorry -- by drawing the smoke deeper into
     the lungs, for example, or by holding it there
     longer before exhaling.
          "In short, human smokers are not smoking
     machines.  They do not necessarily smoke a
     low-nicotine cigarette in the same way they
     smoke a high-nicotine cigarette, nor do they
     smoke the same number of cigarettes when they
     switch to a low-nicotine brand from a
     high-nicotine brand."
          That's all information available to the
     general public of which the public health
     community was well aware, in 1976, hitting all
     of the points Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns said
     they didn't know about until after 1998.  It's
     all there in black and white, 1976, with
     citations in Consumer Reports.
          There was a claim that the tobacco company
     wasn't cooperating with the government.  You 3943
     remember the testimony about the National
     Cancer Institute, Tobacco Working Group, in
     place from 1968 to 1978, working on -- this is
     the government's organization -- with academics
     participation from the industry working on a
     less hazardous cigarette design.
          The testing that I showed you a while
     back, on tumorigenicity, showing that the
     lower-tar cigarettes had less tumors, used
     Philip Morris filters.  They are providing
     those for investigation by the government back
     in the '70s.
          There's a claim that we should be taken to
     task for not marketing a less-nicotine
     cigarette.
          Well, remember that the company actually
     made a new technique for low-nicotine
     cigarettes.  Built a plant, made the
     cigarettes, marketed them as "DeNic cigarettes
     in a whole bunch of brand families, I think
     three or four, and its own brand.
          The public health community took the
     company to task for putting out a cigarette
     that might be more dangerous because it has
     less nicotine in it.  Not safer.  The public 3944
     health community criticized the company for
     putting out a DeNic cigarette, because they
     said, people might think this is safe and it's
     not.
          So the company puts out the DeNic
     cigarette, the public health community
     criticizes the company.  Pulled those
     cigarettes off the market, and just now has --
     I showed you the Merit Ultra -- it doesn't say
     anything about low nicotine, it just has low
     nicotine in it, without trying to advertise it,
     but got in trouble and people complained about
     that.  So they took the DeNic off but kept the
     DeNic in the cigarette, and it's out there on
     the market today.  I showed you a pack when
     Dr. Cummings was here.
          There's a claim that the psychological
     research at the company was not shared with the
     public health community.  Well, remember
     motives and incentives.
          1972, conference put together by Dr. Dunn
     from Philip Morris, attended by all sorts of
     people outside the tobacco company, resulted in
     this book that covers all the articles -- it's
     in evidence, you can get to read -- not this 3945
     one.  This one is going back to the library,
     but there's a copy of it in evidence that
     covers all the subjects that were discussed and
     reported on in that meeting.  Published and
     edited by Dr. Dunn.  If he is trying to hide
     the research, he's not doing a very good job of
     putting it in a book.
          Before I get to -- go through the verdict
     form with you, as I said I would, I just want
     to speak just a moment on damages.  There's not
     any issue in the case, and I think I've said
     this a couple of times, and I mean it
     wholeheartedly, there is no dispute in the case
     that Mr. and Mrs. Sammarco had a loving and
     blessed relationship.  That has never been in
     dispute.  If that was a dispute in the case, we
     wouldn't need to take up your time over three
     weeks to decide it.  That's not in dispute.
     There's a lot of other stuff we can't agree on
     in this case that we've outlined that you're
     going to have to decide for us, based on the
     evidence and the instructions, but Mr. and
     Mrs. Sammarco's relationship is not one of
     them.
          I don't have any basis to provide a number 3946
     that wouldn't seem completely self-serving to
     suggest to you as an alternative to the
     extremely large numbers that Mr. Scarola put up
     there.  Those numbers are outlandish.  They all
     are.  They are put up there to get you thinking
     about large numbers in your head.
          There's no connection between what
     somebody charges per hour for testifying and
     somebody else's loss of a spouse.  It's just
     ridiculous to suggest that.
          What is also not really clear is the fact
     that the overwhelming evidence in the case from
     the family is that Mrs. Sammarco hasn't been
     alone a day since his wife passed away.
          MR. SEXTON:  Ten minutes, Frank.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you, Terry.
          That he has a large, extended, loving and
     close family, and they are with him all the
     time.  The suggestion that there is sorrow or
     grief that is with Mr. Sammarco every second of
     every minute of every day, I'm not sure is
     accurately reflected in the evidence.  Because
     the family continues to be just exemplary.
          So the foundation for those numbers,
     there's just no basis to accept them in 3947
     evidence.  And I would suggest that this is the
     particular issue, if you get this far, if you
     work your way through the verdict form, that's
     left to your sound discretion and reason.
          In the last few moments I have, I'm going
     to take us through the verdict form.
          Robert, may I have the overhead, please.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MR. KELLY:  Thank you very much.  And
     thank you, Robert, for all your help during the
     case.
          Was Theresa Sammarco addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine?  This is the
     question that depends upon what your definition
     of "addiction" is, which I don't know what it
     is.  So your answer could be yes.  Your answer
     could be no.  This one is entirely up to you.
          If you answer no, that's as far as you go.
     If you answer yes, you move on to the next
     question.
          Was Theresa Sammarco's addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of
     her death from lung cancer?
          And this is the Bass/Scarola car crash and
     the broad circumstances of her decision to 3948
     continue smoking.  And I would submit to you
     that the answer is no; in which case, your task
     is over, sign and return the verdict form.
          Number 3.  As of November 21, 1996, did
     Theresa Sammarco have signs or symptoms that
     were diagnosable with the benefit of hindsight
     as lung cancer?  And, of course, hindsight, no
     matter how far we look back, we are about as
     far hindsight as you can be right now from
     November 21, 1996, and there still are no
     x-rays or CT scans before then.  The answer to
     number 3 is no.  Not diagnosable.
          If you get farther, then the question
     becomes one of whether the plaintiff fault
     should be shared with Philip Morris.  And it's
     been our suggestion under the evidence and the
     statements actually of Mrs. Sammarco that
     verdict form question should be answered
     100 percent her choice.
          These are the two complicated questions,
     and I'll read it and I will show you exactly
     how complicated it is.  Did Theresa Sammarco
     justifiably rely upon Philip Morris USA Inc.'s
     concealment or omission of material information
     or failure to disclose a material fact after 3949
     May 5, 1982 regarding the health effects or
     addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both;
     and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
     her lung cancer and death?
          And we have -- there's no omission of
     material information after May of '82 that she
     didn't already know about, that she could rely
     upon.  It never got to her.  And there's no
     indication that if she quit smoking after May
     of '82 that she would have avoided lung cancer
     and death.
          That answer is no for all the same reasons
     the next answer is no.  And for saving time,
     I'm going to avoid reading it.  It's pretty
     much the same issues.
          And then for damages, I'm not going to
     suggest an amount other than to indicate that
     that is within your reasonable and fair
     discretion, taking into consideration the
     relationship that Mr. Sammarco has with his
     entire family and has had that consistently
     since the date of his wife's death.
          And then if you get this far -- like I
     said, I don't think that you will, but if you
     get this far, now with clear and convincing 3950
     evidence being the requirement and not being
     allowed to look at the findings of fact, the
     answer is no, I would suggest.
          MR. SEXTON:  Five minutes.
          MR. KELLY:  And in between each of those
     questions, you'll see there are instructions.
     And that will tell you what to do, depending
     upon your answer.  So you take each question
     and consider it separately, reach your verdict,
     move on or not.  That's how this system --
     that's how the verdict form works.
          And the plaintiff has the burden on each
     and every one of those elements that you are
     going to find in the instruction that is
     necessary to prove to pursue this claim any
     further with some different levels of proof
     required.  He has the final word in this case.
          Let's just say it this way, he has the
     next chance to talk to you.  I'm not sure if
     there's going to be any emotion that might
     creep into the final comments of counsel, but
     if there is, emotion doesn't creep into the
     jury room with you, and you know that.  And you
     know that.
          Mr. Scarola has the next chance to talk, 3951
     but I have the confidence that comes from
     knowing that you have the final word based upon
     the evidence and the jury instructions that
     you're bound to follow using your fair,
     objective, reasonable approach to being a
     juror.
          So I'm going to going conclude.  And I
     thank you very much for your time and for your
     attention.  And, you know, we kind of sneak
     glances over at you every once in a while and
     see you taking notes and following the
     testimony, and we are so grateful for that and
     appreciate it very much.
          Thank you very much.  Thank you, Your
     Honor.
