      MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May
it please the Court.
      Counsel.
      Members of the jury.  Good afternoon.
      You know, I didn't catch all that.  That was a lot of information we had in the last
hour.
      There was one thing I did write down, and
that is Mr. Schlesinger said he wants a calm,
cool, deliberative jury.
      Man, I would hate to see him try to get
somebody fired up if that was calm and cool and
deliberative.
      You know, I actually have been with you
the whole trial.  I was with you during jury
selection, and we talked about a lot of those
issues, and we talked about what the trial was
going to be about, we talked about your
experiences.
      And what we agreed was that you would all
be a fair and impartial jury, and listen to the
evidence and make our decisions based on the
evidence and based on the law.
      So I'll tell you, my closing argument is
going to be a bit different than
Mr. Schlesinger's, because I want to talk about
what we've learned in the last five weeks, and
how it can help you reach a decision in this
case, Ed Caprio's case.
      So I told you in opening statement, we think this case really comes down to three
pretty simple, straightforward questions.
      Why did Mr. Caprio become a smoker?
      When did Mr. Caprio know that smoking is
dangerous?
      And who was in control of Mr. Caprio's
decision to smoke or quit smoking?
      And you may remember in opening statement
I told you what the evidence would be, what I
thought the evidence would be.  And that's that
Mr. Caprio smoked because his friends and
family smoked, and that he liked to smoke.
      And that nothing that the tobacco
companies did caused him to begin or continue
smoking.
      I told you what the evidence would be,
that Mr. Caprio knew for decades that
cigarettes were dangerous and caused lung
cancer and emphysema and other diseases.
      And, finally, I told you that Mr. Caprio
always had the ability to quit smoking whenever
he made up his mind that he truly wanted to
quit, and was willing to stay quit.
      In fact, you remember the evidence was
that the very first time Mr. Caprio tried to quit smoking, that EST class, he quit for a
couple weeks.
      And if you believe the testimony of his
partner Bryan Rintoul, back in the '80s, he
quit smoking cold turkey for six months.
      So let's talk about the first question
and what the evidence was.
      Why did Mr. Caprio become a smoker?
      What you heard was one of the most
important factors in determining whether
someone smokes is whether their friends and
family smoked.
      And you know that most of the important
people in Mr. Caprio's life were smokers.  When
he was growing up, his dad was a smoker.  His
uncles were smokers.  His friends were smokers.
And he and his partner Bryan have smoked
together the last 32 years.
      You heard that when Mr. Caprio was 15
years old, his friend Janice Brown offered him
his first cigarette.  And she taught him how to
smoke.
      You remember that testimony?
      And Mr. Caprio admitted that the first
few cigarettes, he inhaled that cigarette smoke and it made him light-headed and dizzy, made
him cough, and it wasn't a very pleasant
experience for him.
      But he worked at it.  He worked at it,
and he was able to overcome his body's natural
defenses and learned how to smoke.
      Over the next few years, he smoked a
couple cigarettes a day, and then he smoked
more.  And then he got up to a pack a day,
essentially a pack and a half a day.  Then
ultimately, two packs a day.
      Mr. Caprio was specifically asked why he
started smoking, and he told you.  He said
there were two reasons.
      He said:  Because everyone was doing it,
and he wanted to fit in.
      That was why Mr. Caprio became a smoker.
      Second question.  When did Mr. Caprio
know that smoking is dangerous?
      Before Mr. Caprio smoked his first
cigarette, studies were already being published
to link cigarette smoking with lung cancer.
      Remember his first cigarette, December of
1958.
      And I talked with Dr. Proctor about all the studies that were being done beginning in
1950.  Remember the retrospective
epidemiological studies, those that were done
in Britain, those that were done in the United
States.
      And Dr. Proctor told you about the
massive publicity about these studies, not just
in medical journals, but in popular magazines
and newspapers too.
      And he told you, of all the articles,
there was one that was particularly important.
You remember it's called "Cancer by the
Carton," published in Reader's Digest in 1952.
      And he told you it was important because
it had a very provocative and impactful title.
And what it said was:  Every time you buy a
carton of cigarettes, you're buying a carton of
cancer.
      This was six years, six years before
Mr. Caprio smoked his first cigarette.
      You heard from both the plaintiff and the
defendant the famous mouse skin painting
studies.  What Dr. Proctor told you was these
were a really big deal.  They got a ton of
attention, and they caused people to stop smoking, and they caused cigarette sales to go
down.
      Here is how it was reported in Life
Magazine, one of the most popular magazines of
the time.  Remember the pictorial magazine
you'll have in evidence.
      "Smoke Gets in the News."  Doctors report
tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in
cigarette use and human lung cancer.
      Members of the jury, we know for a fact
that these studies were getting attention and
people were talking about them.  Because in
June of 1954, when Ed Caprio was around 10
years old, there was a national poll.
      And the question was:  Have you heard or
read anything recently to the effect that
cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of
the lungs?
      90 percent said yes.  This is back in
1954.  90 percent said yes.
      So you had articles being published in
newspapers, in medical journals, in magazines.
You had people talking about them.  You had
polls.
      But they were also reported on television.  And you remember both the
plaintiff and the defendant talked to you about
a program called "See It Now."  It was hosted
by Edward R. Murrow.  He was probably the most
respected journalist of his generation.
Probably the closest thing that many of us
remember is Walter Cronkite.  And he had this
program called "See It Now."
      Dr. Proctor told you it was essentially
kind of a 1950s version of 60 Minutes.
      So let me show you just two brief clips.
One from Dr. Ernst Wynder, who did the mouse
skin painting test, and did that early
retrospective statistical study.
      And then from E. Cuyler Hammond from the
American Cancer Society who did a very
important study in 1952.
      This is Dr. Ernst Wynder.
      (The video clip was played and taken down
      to the best of the reporter's ability as
      follows:)
      VOICE:  We believe that the present
evidence that it strongly indicates that
tobacco smoking, and particularly cigarette
smoking, is a major cause of lung cancer.       This does not mean that we believe it is
the only cause.  Certainly there are a few that
may develop lung cancer without ever having
smoked.  And there are, of course, many who do
smoke and who never develop this disease.
      (Video clip concluded.)
      MR. COFER:  So that was Ernst Wynder.
      And here is E. Cuyler Hammond, from the
American Cancer Society.
      (The video clip was played and taken down
      to the best of the reporter's ability as
      follows:)
      VOICE:  Good evening.  This is "See It
Now," produced by the partnership of Friendly
and Murrow.  Tonight, the first of two reports
on cigarettes and lung cancer.
      In 1952, Drs. Hammond and Horn of the
American Cancer Society began an extended study
of the smoking habits of American men.
      Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the
results of the first two years.
      VOICE:  It is now established in my
opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that
cigarette smoking greatly increases the
probability of developing lung cancer.       In my opinion, people should be warned of
the danger, and they are being warned.  What
they then want to do, whether they wish to
smoke or not, is their own business.
      (Video clip concluded.)
      MR. COFER:  So members of the jury, that
was 1955.  And so we know that before
Mr. Caprio ever tried that first cigarette, he
was already on notice that cigarette smoking
was linked with lung cancer, and cigarette
smoking could be dangerous.
      Ten years later, in 1964, the Surgeon
General of the United States published his
landmark report concluding that cigarette
smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer.
      And you remember, Dr. Proctor told you
this was a huge deal.  It was literally front
page news.
      Remember, I showed you the New York Times
article and the one from the Chicago Tribune.
The one from the Chicago Tribune said:
Cigarettes kill.
      And you saw the one from the New York
Times.  It was the lead story on nightly
newscasts.  It was on the cover of major magazines.  People were talking about it.
      You remember I asked Proctor about
something called a paradigm shift.  Something
that really kind of focuses people and changes
their perspective.
      The '64 Surgeon General's report was one
of those.  Here is how the report was covered
on CBS with Harry Reasoner.
      (The video clip was played and taken down
      to the best of the reporter's ability as
      follows:)
      VOICE:  This is a CBS News Extra on
smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon
General's Committee.
      VOICE:  Almost from the moment that
cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked.
But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago,
and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon
General's committee.
      This in summary is what the committee
says:  Cigarette smoking is a major cause of
lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers
points the same way.
      Cigarette smoking is a significant cause
of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung
diseases.
      Male smokers have a much higher death
rate from heart disease, although it's not
proven that smoking is the cause.
      On the question of filters, the committee
says there is no evidence that they do any
good, but it didn't exclude the possibility
that an effective filter might be developed.
      In short, the committee says, if you
smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of
dying early.
      The sooner you start, the more you smoke,
the more you inhale, the worse your chances
are.
      The Surgeon General's Committee presented
its report at a news conference in Washington.
      VOICE:  After long and exhaustive
deliberations, the committee has reached the
overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a
health hazard of sufficient importance to the
United States to warrant remedial action.
      This overall judgment was supported by
many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is
related to higher death rates in a number of
disease categories.
      More specifically, the committee states
on page 61 of the report, and I quote, "In view
of the continuing and mounting evidence from
many sources, it is the judgment of the
committee that cigarette smoking contributes
substantially to mortality from certain
specific diseases, and to the overall death
rate."
      VOICE:  Cigarettes have been an intimate
and reassuring companion.  The familiar
slogans, the familiar packages have been a part
of our lives.
      It's like being told that an old friend
has all along been betraying you.  In a case
like that, you give the old friend every
possible chance before you finally decide to
believe what you've been told and maybe even
then, you give him a chance to reform.
      In this kind of a country, it comes down
to you, whether you like it or not.  No one is
going to forbid an adult to smoke.  And it is
now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either.
      The decision is his, the decision and the
health that may depend on it.
      This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
      (Video clip concluded.)
      MR. COFER:  That's how the '64 Surgeon
General's report was covered on CBS.
Dr. Proctor told you there were comparable
programs on ABC and NBC as well, the only three
networks.
      It saturated -- it absolutely saturated
the airwaves, saturated public media of what we
read, what we talked, what we saw.
      So at the time, Mr. Caprio was 20 years
old.  He was a smoker, but he hadn't been
smoking very long.  So as a result of the '64
Surgeon General's report, what happened?
      Congress got involved, and they passed
the Federal Cigarette Labeling Act, and they
mandated that warnings go on cigarette packs.
      This is the first warning.  Congress
wrote it.  They told the companies exactly what
it would say, how big it would be, and where it
would be placed on the pack.
      From this time on, from January 1, 1966 -- 1966 -- every cigarette sold in this
country came in a pack with a warning on it.
      Four years later, the warning was
changed, making it stronger.
      This time, the warning said.  Warning:
The Surgeon General has determined that
cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
      That warning was on the pack for the next
15 years.
      Two years later, this warning went to
cigarette advertisements.  Ads went off the air
in 1971.
      Then in 1972, the warning went on all
print ads, and Mr. Caprio testified that he saw
this warning; and that he also heard that tar
was dangerous, and nicotine was addictive.
      So he switched to a light cigarette
because he thought smoking two packs of lights
was the same as smoking one pack of
full-flavored cigarettes.
      Mr. Caprio admitted that the light
cigarettes he smoked had the same warning on
the pack as full-flavored cigarettes, and he
admitted that every pack he ever bought had
warnings on them.       In 1979 or in 1980, Mr. Caprio's first
partner, Edgar Barney, died of AIDS.
      In 1982, he began his relationship with
Mr. Rintoul.  And they moved in together in
'83.
      Over the next several years, the AIDS
epidemic took 32 of Mr. Caprio and
Mr. Rintoul's friends.
      And because Mr. Caprio was at risk of
developing the AIDS virus, he would routinely
have his blood tested and would have chest
X-rays.
      Mr. Caprio said he was constantly worried
about his blood work and waiting for the test
results.
      He said that he got chest X-rays all the
time.  In fact, Mr. Rintoul said they got chest
X-rays every three months.
      But even though he was a two-pack-a-day
smoker in the '80s, Mr. Caprio said that no
doctor ever told him to stop smoking or ever
talked with him about his smoking.
      And that's true, even though in 1985,
this warning went on the pack.  The warning
specifically said smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate
pregnancy and quitting smoking now greatly
reduces serious risks to your health.
      This was the warning that was on the pack
when Mr. Caprio and Mr. Rintoul were having
chest X-rays.
      Now, Mr. Caprio admitted he saw these
warnings, but he also admitted that they didn't
cause him to change his behavior in any way.
      Members of the jury, we know that for a
fact that the public was being warned that
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart
disease, and emphysema, and that quitting
smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to
health.
      But more importantly, we also know that
at the same time, Mr. Caprio got a very
personal warning that smoking causes emphysema
and COPD and what can happen if you keep
smoking and don't quit.
      Mr. Caprio had an uncle named Arthur
Giardello that he was very close to.  You
remember, he and Dottie lived in Florida.  Even
moved to Georgia with him for a while.
      And Mr. Giardello in the mid '80s was diagnosed with mild COPD.  But he continued to
smoke, and his smoking caused his COPD to get
worse and worse.  And Mr. Caprio told you that
he started having breathing problems.
      Arthur Giardello wasn't the only person
in Mr. Caprio's life in the '80s who was having
problems with COPD.
      His brother-in-law, John's father,
Mavrakis' dad, was also diagnosed with COPD.
And John's dad had to go on oxygen because of
his illness.
      So John called up Mr. Caprio and said:
You've got to quit smoking.  Look at my dad.
      So here in the '80s, he had two family
members that he cared about that had COPD that
continued to smoke as he got worse and worse.
      In 1986 -- or 1996, Mr. Caprio was
diagnosed with COPD.  And remember, Mr. Caprio
was actually taking care of Arthur and Dottie,
because Dottie had Alzheimer's.
      So he actually saw and witnessed the
effect of COPD on his uncle.
      Then a few months later after Mr. Caprio
was diagnosed, then Arthur died from a
combination of emphysema and COPD.  That was just months.  Arthur died just months after
Mr. Caprio was diagnosed.
      So members of the jury, when Dr. Patel
told Mr. Caprio that he had mild COPD and he
needed to quit smoking before it got worse, he
wasn't telling Mr. Caprio anything he didn't
already know.
      Mr. Caprio watched an uncle he loved with
COPD who continued smoking and got worse and
worse and worse until his uncle died.
      His brother-in-law John and his
sister-in-law Louise were dealing with the very
same issue with John's dad.
      In March of 1996, when Mr. Caprio was
diagnosed, he already had two very personal
examples of what will happen to a person who
has COPD and continues to smoke.
      So it was a wake-up call for him.  March
of 1996 was a wake-up call.  Until then, he
knew that smoking could cause COPD.  He just
didn't think it would happen to him.
      But in March of 1996, members of the
jury, it did happen to him.
      And you remember what Mr. Rintoul told
you from the stand?  He said:  You never think it's going to happen to you.  But when it does,
it hits home.  It's devastating.
      And Mr. Caprio said the same thing.
      Now it wasn't just an abstract risk.
Mr. Caprio knew that his smoking was harming
him.  And Dr. Patel specifically told
Mr. Caprio to quit smoking and had a long
discussion with him about the various ways he
could quit.
      Now, Mr. Schlesinger said something that
I thought was really just right on.  And he
said that the medical records that the treaters
created, they're credible.  They are natural.
They are organic.  They weren't prepared for
litigation.  This was what was happening long
before there was ever thought to be a lawsuit.
      Here is what Dr. Patel wrote back in
March of 1996.  A long discussion was had with
the patient about quitting smoking.  Various
ways were discussed with him, and he was
advised that his own motivation is really
important to adhere to the program.  He was
also advised to contact the American Lung
Association.
      You remember I talked to Dr. Seidman about that, and what you learned was that
starting in the 1980s, the American Lung
Association produced excellent quitting and
maintenance manuals that helped people quit.
      They actually had classes that you could
go to, seven-week classes where they had
professionals that would work with you to help
you quit.  They weren't just booklets.
      And you heard Dr. Patel tell you that he
had success in the past with his patients right
here locally using the American Lung
Association to quit.
      And that's why he suggested that
Mr. Caprio go.
      Well, Mr. Caprio did quit smoking that
very day.  He quit cold turkey, and he stayed
quit for a couple of weeks.  But he never
contacted the American Lung Association.
      And you remember what he said?  You
remember what Mr. Caprio said?  That once he
started feeling better, he kind of resumed his
life again and went back to smoking.
      Members of the jury, in 1996, an alarm
clock went off.  But Mr. Caprio ignored it.
      But then five years later, in March of 2001, Mr. Caprio got a second wake-up call.  He
coughed up blood.  You heard Bryan describe how
scared they were.
      And he went to the doctor.  He was
diagnosed with lung cancer.  And he ultimately
had two lungs -- or two lobes of his right lung
removed.
      But, again, Mr. Caprio was really, really
lucky.  The doctors were able to get all of the
cancer.
      Remember Dr. Mannino told you, a tumor
that big, I don't know how often that happens.
But they were -- they were able to get all the
cancer.
      And he didn't need chemotherapy and he
didn't need radiation, and he was cured.  He
has been cancer-free for 14 years, and he's
cured.
      And after his surgery, his doctors were
elated at how well they were doing.  They had a
man with a huge lung cancer.  They were able to
cure it.  Here is what they wrote.  2001.
      This is Dr. Green, the surgeon.  His
postoperative course has been smooth and
unremarkable.  It is important to note that he has stopped tobacco use completely.
      It's also important to note that he has
been able to wean himself off of the home
oxygen.  He plans on returning to work within
the next week.  We could not be more pleased
than being able to see your patient looking so
well following resectional lung surgery.
      Mr. Caprio was actually briefly on oxygen
because of the surgery, because he needed it
after he had the lungs removed.  So he had a
preview of what life would be like if he
required oxygen.
      But he was able to wean himself off of
it.  He was clear to return to work.  He
stopped smoking and did not smoke a single
cigarette for somewhere between three and six
months.  Put the cigarettes down for three to
six months.
      But then, according to his sister, one of
the closest people in his life, Mr. Caprio told
her he tried a cigarette again because he
wanted to see if he could smoke again.
      At first, he couldn't.  The smoking made
him dizzy and nauseous and light-headed.  But
he worked at it.       And just like he did when he was 15 years
old, he overcame his body's natural defenses
for a second time.  And that's how, 43 years
after he first learned to smoke, five years
after he was diagnosed with mild COPD, six
months after he had surgery to have two lobes
of his lung removed, Mr. Caprio became a smoker
again.
      For the next six months, he smoked one
cigarette, maybe two, tops, a day.  He
gradually worked himself up to six cigarettes a
day.  Some days, he smoked up to ten cigarettes
a day.
      For the last few years, Mr. Caprio hasn't
smoked every day.  On the days he has smoked,
he's smoked between two and four cigarettes.
      And then two months ago, they told you
that he's finally quit smoking for good.
      Members of the jury, there is absolutely
no doubt that for a very, very long time,
Mr. Caprio has personally understood that
smoking is dangerous.
      Until 1996, he just didn't think it would
happen to him.  In 1996, he got a wake-up call,
and he didn't answer it.       In 2001, he got a second wake-up call,
and he answered it for about a year.
      That takes us to our final question.
      Who was in control of Mr. Caprio's
decision to smoke or quit smoking?
      Members of the jury, it is undisputed.
It is undisputed.  Every expert who was called
in this case told you that even addicted
smokers can and do quit smoking.
      Dr. Mannino from Kentucky told you, being
addicted does not mean a person can't quit
smoking.  He said addicted smokers can and do
quit smoking every day.  He said there are
currently 60 million former smokers in the
United States.  And in Dr. Mannino's opinion,
the vast majority of those men and women were
addicted.
      Don't get me wrong.  I am not saying it's
easy for everyone to quit.  Quitting smoking is
not something that you can accomplish just by
taking a pill or pushing a button.
      For some people, it's really hard and
they have to try and they have to try again.
And then they have to hang in there when they
find themselves in situations where they used to smoke.
      But it is absolutely undisputed that even
addicted smokers can and do quit smoking.
      Mr. Hammer said that Ed was hopelessly
addicted, and Ed can't put it down.  That's
what he told you today.
      Dr. Herrera said he was so addicted that
Mr. Caprio would die without the nicotine.
      Do you remember, on his deposition, he
said:  I'm not even going to try to tell him to
quit, because he would die without the
nicotine.
      Well, we know that's not true.  According
to Mr. Caprio himself, for the last few days he
smoked some days and not others.
      On the days he did smoke, he didn't smoke
many cigarettes.  He used something called the
TarBar that he said filtered at least some
portion of the tar and nicotine.
      And Dr. Seidman told you, while it's true
that Mr. Caprio has still been smoking
cigarettes, it's been years since he inhaled
any appreciable amount of nicotine.
      Think about that.
      If, for the last few years you don't smoke every day, on the days you do smoke, you
smoke a couple cigarettes a day, you don't
smoke the cigarette all the way down, you use a
filter, I don't know how much it filters out,
but at least some of it, you're not getting
much nicotine.
      So why did he smoke?  He still did.  Why?
If he was not getting very much nicotine, then
why would he continue to smoke a few cigarettes
a few days a week?
      Well, Dr. Mannino told you that nicotine
is not the only reason people smoke.  He told
you some people and some smokers enjoy the
process of smoking; they enjoy the social
interaction of smoking.  Some people say they
enjoy the taste of smoking.
      And he told you that some people use
cigarettes to self-medicate for anxiety or
depression.
      And Dr. Herrera and Dr. Dorce both told
you that that's what Mr. Caprio does, at least
that's what he did.  He would use cigarettes to
self-medicate for his mood disorder.
      Dr. Mannino told you there is a large
behavioral component of smoking, and that making any long-term behavioral change is hard.
      Dr. Seidman told you that the constant
repetition of smoking involves tremendous habit
strength and conditioning, and becomes a part
of your life.  It can become a ritual.
      Dr. Dorce and Dr. Seidman both told you
there are triggers that tell the brain to
smoke.
      Let me just pause for a second.  I did
ask Dr. Seidman, why didn't you try to help
Mr. Caprio quit smoking.
      Once a lawsuit is filed, the defendant
can't talk to the plaintiff.  The experts we
hire cannot talk to the plaintiff.
      Dr. Andrews couldn't talk to Mr. Caprio.
Dr. Dorce could only do it under the terms of
that compulsive medical exam.
      The experts, Dr. Seidman and Dr. Mannino,
the plaintiff hired, are hired by the
plaintiff.  He is their representative.  They
can talk to him if they want to.
      So I want to make sure you understand the
difference.  You had Dr. Seidman talking about
all the different things he could do to help
people quit smoking, and his concern for Mr. Caprio.
      And I just asked:  Well, did you try to
help him smoke --
      That's not my role.  His role in this
case was a hired expert to come testify.
      But in any event, Dr. Dorce and
Dr. Seidman both told you that there are
triggers that tell the brain to smoke.  They
told you that worries about money or family
problems or any kind of stress can be a trigger
to smoke.
      You know and you heard from all the
experts and also from the Surgeon General that
one of the most important triggers is when
you're around people that smoke.
      The Surgeon General recognized clear back
in the '70s that having a spouse or significant
other that smoked can make it very hard for a
person to successfully quit smoking.
      And members of the jury, it's been
undisputed that throughout their life together,
Mr. Rintoul has been a smoker.  Today he's
currently a daily smoker.
      And for the last six years, Mr. Rintoul's
mother Nina has lived with them, and she smokes too.
      Now, plaintiff argues that nicotine took
away Mr. Caprio's free will; that it took away
his choice whether to smoke or not smoke.
      We know that's not true.  In fact, in
response to one of Mr. Hammer's questions,
Dr. Seidman told you that nicotine does not
eliminate free choice, or control of free
choice.
      In fact, here is what Dr. Seidman says on
his app to addicted smokers.
      (The video clip was played and taken down
      to the best of the reporter's ability as
      follows:)
      VOICE:  Urges and cravings to smoke are
not choices.  However, the actions you take in
response to the urges and cravings is a choice.
      The cigarette has no magical power,
except what you give it.  When not acted on,
urges to smoke, no matter how powerful, occur
less often and become easier to ignore.
      By not acting on the urge to smoke, you
choose voluntarily to protect your body and
your health.  You choose not to act on the urge
to smoke because you truly believe this will make life better.
      (Video clip concluded.)
      MR. COFER:  You know, the great thing
about juries is your collective common sense
and your collective life experience.  And you
can bring experts in all day, but some things
just make sense.
      So let me ask you this.  If Mr. Caprio
was so hopelessly addicted to nicotine that he
simply couldn't function without it, how did he
manage to quit smoking for six months in 1985
or '86?
      Or for three or four months in 2001?  Or
for four or five or six months in 2005?  Or
since January 1st, 2015?
      If he was so hopelessly addicted to
nicotine, how could he do that?
      Members of the jury, only Mr. Caprio
could choose to smoke or quit smoking.  More
importantly, only Mr. Caprio could choose to
stay quit once he quit.  That's not something
anybody else could do for him.
      Why is that so important?  As we all
know, every time you go to a doctor, a doctor
asks if you smoke.  If a patient says yes, the doctor tells the patient to quit smoking.  And
that's been true for a very long time.
      And why do they do that?  The reason that
doctors tell people to quit smoking is because
when you quit smoking, your risk of getting a
smoking-related disease goes down.
      And if a smoker quits early enough and
stays quit long enough, his or her risk
basically becomes the same as a never smoker.
      How do we know that?  Both Dr. Proctor
and Dr. Mannino told you about a very important
study that proves that's true.
      In 1951, Sir Richard Doll signed up
35,000 British doctors, and he studied them for
50 years, to learn how smoking increases a
person's risk of dying; and, importantly, what
happens when they quit.
      In 2004, Dr. Doll published the
conclusion to his 50-year doctor study.  What
did it conclude?  Basically, smokers died on
average ten years younger than lifelong
nonsmokers.
      What happens when you quit?  If you quit
by age 30 -- and actually, it's age 35, you get
all ten years back.       If you quit between the ages of 35 and
44, you get nine years back.  If you quit
between 45 and 54, you get six years back.
      So think about how that applies to this
case.
      The evidence was if Mr. Caprio had quit
smoking in 1964 when the Surgeon General report
came out, or in 1966 when the first warning
went on the pack, or in 1970, when the warning
was changed making it stronger to say cigarette
smoking is dangerous.
      Or even as late as 1978, based on this
study, as Proctor told you one of the seminal
studies on the effects of smoking and quitting
smoking, he would have avoided all of his risk
of getting a smoking-related cancer.
      If he'd quit by 1988, by 1988, when he
was 44 years old, he would have avoided
90 percent of the excess risk of getting lung
cancer or any other smoking-related disease.
      And what would have happened to
Mr. Caprio's risk of getting COPD if he'd quit
before the age of 45?
      Remember Dr. Mannino?  This is a slide,
this is a graph that Dr. Mannino prepared, and he uses it to teach other doctors and people
about COPD.  COPD risk and smoking cessation.
      And what it says is, the blue line, we
all lose lung function as we get older.
      This orange line, that's what happens to
people, they are susceptible, cigarette
smokers, susceptible to cigarette smoke.  See
how their lung function declines, they get
symptoms of disability and death.
      But look what happens when they quit.
That red line right there.  Quitting at age 45.
Your rate of loss of lung function reverts back
to that of a never smoker.
      The fact that you've got a tennis court
full of lung capacity is amazing.  Because what
it means is you can lose a substantial portion
of your lung function, and it doesn't affect
you, because you have so much excess capacity.
      This is Dr. Mannino.  This is their
expert.  This is the guy they brought to go
over the 2014 Surgeon General report that he
wrote, that he stands by to teach doctors and
people -- patients about the benefits of
quitting smoking.
      So in 1989, that was when Mr. Caprio was 45 years old.  1989.
      Let's look at the things that happened in
his life before then.  Early '80s, Arthur was
diagnosed with COPD.
      '85, warning went on the pack:  Smoking
causes emphysema.  Quitting smoking now greatly
reduces serious risks to health.
      His brother-in-law's dad diagnosed with
COPD, he goes on oxygen.  He attends that first
EST program, first time he quit smoking.  And
according to Mr. Rintoul, he quit smoking for
six months.
      What would have happened?  If you believe
Dr. Mannino, he could have avoided the risk of
COPD.  And what would have happened if he would
have quit in '96 or '97?  What would have
happened had he quit in 1996, had he waited
until he was diagnosed with mild COPD?
      Well, if you look at this, right there,
quitting at 45, that person is already down to
75 percent lung function, based on FEV1, the
measure.
      Do you remember what Mr. Caprio's FEV1
was in 1996 when he was diagnosed with mild
COPD?  Do you remember?       Dr. Andrews told you yesterday.  Do you
remember?  It was 91 percent.  Up here.
      And Dr. Andrews told you that if
Mr. Caprio would have quit smoking in 1996,
when he was diagnosed with COPD, or 1997 when
his uncle Arthur died, he still would have had
COPD, that's true.
      But his rate of loss of lung function
would have been such that he never likely would
have had symptoms, never would have been
disabled and never would have risked dying from
COPD.
      Remember in 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000,
2001, he didn't even have any medication.
      He didn't need oxygen full time until
2005, almost ten years later.  So quitting
makes a difference.
      All right.  Do you remember Dr. Seidman?
Remember I showed him his book.
      And I said:  You know, Dr. Seidman, one
of the things that's really important to you is
helping people quit smoking in time to avoid
getting sick, right?
      He goes:  Yeah, absolutely, my life's
work.       I said:  You detail in your book some
examples of your experience, right?
      And remember, I read him this one.
Breathing easier for life.
      One day a man with emphysema -- this is
Dr. Seidman -- arrived at our clinic, pale as a
ghost, seemingly at death's door.  He was on a
waiting list for a lung transplant and needed
to carry a tank of oxygen just to get to the
appointment.
      I had always heard that emphysema
patients who quit smoking don't get better;
they just don't get worse, except for an
age-related decline in their lung function.
      This man, however, soon began to look
more alive after going smoke free.  Eventually
he started smoking up at the clinic without his
oxygen tank.  More than a year after stopping
smoking, he said he never used his oxygen
anymore.
      If this kind of improvement is possible
in someone with advanced emphysema, imagine how
much more easily you would be able to breathe
and the health benefits you will enjoy not just
today, but every day for the rest of your life. Remember, I showed that from
       Dr. Seidman's book.  Remember what he said.
             He goes:  Yeah, that was a great story.
       Thank you for sharing that with the jury.  That
       was an example of one of my patients who
       followed the program and quit and the
       difference it made in his life.
             Okay.  Two ships passing in the night.
If you think about the evidence in this case, it's
almost as if you're listening to two different trials.
The plaintiff's case and the defendants' case have
been like two ships passing in the night.
             You know, I think it's pretty clear from
opening statement on, that we believe this case comes
down to two words, "Ed Caprio."  That's because this
is Mr. Caprio's case.  He is the one that's asking you
for money.  He is the one claiming that the defendants
wronged him.
             And you know what, as much as Mr. Hammer
and Mr. Schlesinger may want it to be, this is not a
referendum on cigarette smoking or the tobacco
companies.
             This is a personal injury lawsuit brought
by one man who claims that the defendants are
responsible for his COPD and lung cancer. It's a personal injury lawsuit.  No more,
and no less.
             It's a case about one man and whether he
is entitled to recover under the law of the facts
based on his decisions to begin and continue smoking.
             That's why we've done our best to bring
you evidence that focuses on Mr. Caprio.  What he knew
and when he knew it.  Why he smoked and why he waited
so long to quit.
             Now, I think it's quite obvious that
plaintiff agrees this case comes down to two words.
But for plaintiff, those two words are not "Ed
Caprio."  Those two words are "punitive damages."
             From Mr. Hammer's opening statement to
the witnesses they called in this case and the
evidence they chose to present to Mr. Schlesinger's
closing impassioned argument this morning, it is clear
that plaintiff wants to spend as little time as
possible talking about Ed Caprio.
             If you took all the words Mr. Schlesinger
spoke this afternoon, how many times do you think he
even mentioned his client's name?
             Why?  Because plaintiff wants to make you
mad.  They want to ring the bell in this case, they
want to get you fired up to bring back a big old punitive damage award.  They make no apology for it.
             In fact, Mr. Hammer said:  Look forward
to talking to you more about punitive damages.
             Mr. Schlesinger:  Most important question
to me is punitive damages.
             You know, you probably -- I actually
counted it.  You think back to Mr. Hammer's opening
statement.  He used the word "punitive damages" five
times in opening statement, and some variation of the
word "punish" another 14 times.
             But he never told you about Uncle Arthur,
or John's father-in-law, or the times that Mr. Caprio
quit smoking, or why Mr. Caprio made the decisions he
did.
             Who introduced you to Mr. Caprio and told
you about his family and his life and what he knew and
the decisions he made?
             You know, plaintiff's first witness was
Dr. Proctor.  Do you remember Dr. Proctor?  He
testified for all or part of six days.  And what did
he know about Ed Caprio?  Nothing.
             Not a thing.  In fact, he admitted he
knows absolutely nothing about Ed Caprio.
             In fact, you know what he said?  The only
thing he knew?  Mr. Gdanski told Dr. Proctor that Mr. Caprio is gay.
             In a lawsuit where you're suing for
injuries caused from tobacco, why would that be the
only fact you tell Dr. Proctor?  You know,
Dr. Proctor's testimony in this courtroom over those
six days is the same as it was the following week down
the hall --
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, Judge, improper
       argument.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead.
             MR. COFER:  The same as it was the
       following week down the hall in Judge Murphy's
       courtroom.  The same as it will be in a
       courtroom across the state next week.  The same
       as it is in every courtroom basically every
       week.
             Why would Mr. Gdanski spend the first six
       days of Ed Caprio's case calling a witness who
       knows absolutely nothing about Mr. Caprio?
             How could that possibly help you decide
       the issues in Ed Caprio's case?
             I want you to think about some of the
       things that plaintiff told you and the
       impression he tried to leave you with. On direct examination, Mr. Gdanski and
       Dr. Proctor showed you this document and tried
       to leave you with the impression that Philip
       Morris paid to put product placement in The
       Muppet Movie.
             Well, I think we can agree that would
       have been a really bad thing to do.  But it
       wasn't until cross-examination that you heard
       it never happened.  It didn't happen.
             There were no Philip Morris products in
       The Muppet Movie.  There were no cigarettes in
       The Muppet Movie.
             In fact, Dr. Proctor admitted the only
       smoking done in the movie is by a bartender, a
       used car salesman, and a Hollywood mogul played
       by Orson Welles who smoked cigars in the
       El Sleazo cafe scene in the version in the
       United Kingdom.
             Why in the world would Mr. Gdanski and
       Dr. Proctor suggest that Philip Morris placed
       products in The Muppet Movie when they knew it
       wasn't true?
             You know, another example is when
       Mr. Hammer and Mr. Gdanski and Dr. Proctor all
       said the defendants lied.  That is their word, "lied," when the CEO said they believed it was
       not appropriate to label cigarette smoking as
       an addiction.
             Now, it's clear the tobacco companies
       never said that smoking isn't hard to quit.
       The argument was whether the word "addiction"
       was the appropriate term to describe that it
       can be hard to quit.
             You remember until 1988, the Surgeon
       General said smoking is not an addiction
       because it's not intoxicating.
             In 1988, the Surgeon General changed the
       definition and said intoxication is no longer
       required and said it is now addicting.
             And it's true the companies cried foul.
       They said, you know what, it's inappropriate to
       label smokers as addicts.  And they said they
       believed the definition was not based on new
       science; it was politically motivated.  And
       they told Congress that in the Waxman hearings.
             And then Mr. Gdanski and Mr. Hammer and
       Dr. Proctor said the CEOs lied when they took
       that position.
             But here is the fascinating part.  This
       is Dr. Seidman's book four years later. Seidman says -- this is five years after the
       Waxman hearings:  Although the medical and
       scientific community would prefer not to use
       the term "addiction," the term is widely used
       to imply severe drug dependency.
             Five years after the CEOs said they
       thought it was not appropriate to characterize
       the fact that it would be hard to quit as an
       addiction, Seidman wrote in a book that the
       medical and scientific community would prefer
       not to use the term.
             Why?  Because the term is unscientific,
       it's pejorative, and it doesn't have accepted
       meaning.
             Why didn't Mr. Gdanski and Mr. Hammer and
       Dr. Proctor tell you that?
             Why didn't they tell you that their own
       expert five years later said the medical and
       scientific community doesn't like the term?
             Well, if your goal is a large punitive
       damage award, you don't want to let facts get
       in the way.
             So why did Mr. Gdanski think it was so
       important to tell Dr. Proctor the one fact that
       Mr. Caprio was gay? Well, that leads us to the most cynical
       and most misleading ploy of all that's occurred
       in this case, and that's the testimony about
       Project SCUM.  And I'm not going to say much
       about it, because I suspect Mr. Seiden will
       address it.
             But here is the bottom line.  To suggest
       that the poor judgment of one employee at one
       company on one project somehow reflects the
       values and actions of an entire company or,
       indeed, an entire industry is just
       intellectually dishonest.
             In fact, the argument is shameful.
       Again, why?  Why was Dr. Proctor asked these
       kinds of questions?  Why did he give this kind
       of testimony?
             Because they want money.  And not just a
       small amount of money.  They want a lot of
       money.
             Dr. Proctor told you on direct
       examination, and certainly Mr. Schlesinger's
       suggestion in trial today was that the
       company's behavior hasn't changed.  That's been
       a common theme you've heard from opening
       statement through closing argument. And then on cross-examination, what did
       you learn?  That was one of the first things I
       told you before lunch.  When I finally got a
       chance to ask him about 30 minutes worth of
       questions.
             You've learned that the companies haven't
       advertised on billboards, in public transit,
       and stadiums for the last 17 years.  Philip
       Morris voluntarily stopped advertising in
       magazines a decade ago.
             The companies no longer sponsor sporting
       events, concerts, or have any branded
       merchandise.
             You heard that all of the defendants for
       the last 15 years have websites where they
       admit smoking causes cancer, smoking is
       addictive.
             There is no such thing as a safe
       cigarette, and they have links that actually
       take you to public health pages.  They say if
       you want information, you're deciding whether
       to smoke or quit and you want information, they
       direct you to public health websites.
             You didn't hear that on direct
       examination, you didn't hear that in closing argument, you didn't hear that in opening
       statement.
             Since 2009, the companies have been
       subject to extensive FDA regulation.  The FDA
       can ban any ingredient in cigarettes except
       nicotine, and they can order the companies to
       reduce the level of nicotine to any level the
       FDA wants.
             The companies have to disclose their
       research and marketing and other documents to
       the FDA.  The FDA can and does make unannounced
       inspections at the labs and manufacturing and
       research facilities.
             Members of the jury, the fact is the
       companies act in a much more transparent and
       regulated environment than they did in the
       past.
             Why did Dr. Proctor try to lead you
       otherwise?  Again, I think the answer is pretty
       obvious.
             So let's change topics.
             How am I doing on the time, Your Honor?
             THE COURT:  Let's see.  52 minutes so
       far.
             MR. COFER:  Thank you. Mr. Schlesinger, Mr. Hammer, Mr. Gdanski
       talked a lot about filters and light
       cigarettes.  They argued that Mr. Caprio
       switched to filters and lights because the
       defendants fooled him into thinking they had
       less tar and nicotine so they were safer.
             So let's briefly talk about the brands
       that Mr. Caprio smoked and why he smoked them.
       When he was a teenager, he would smoke whatever
       brand was available.
             Janice was the one that bought the
       cigarettes and whatever she bought, he smoked.
       When he was first buying cigarettes, remember
       he went to the newsstand.  They were in a cigar
       box.  He bought whatever cigarettes were in the
       cigar box.  He didn't buy a particular brand.
             The first brand he actually bought was
       after he dropped out of high school and had a
       job.  He bought Lucky Strikes.
             Why did he buy Luckies?  He had a
       co-worker named Herbert Turner who smoked them.
       His dad smoked them, and they were a popular
       brand.  He smoked Lucky Strike for about a year
       and then switched to Marlboro.
             And Mr. Caprio's dad smoked Marlboro too. Marlboro is a filtered cigarette.  Lucky Strike
       is unfiltered.
             And members of the jury, Mr. Caprio told
       you that health concerns had absolutely nothing
       to do with his decision to switch to filtered
       cigarettes, to Marlboro in particular, filtered
       cigarettes in general.
             He told you the reason he switched to
       filters is he didn't like getting tobacco in
       his mouth or on his tongue.
             He was specifically asked if he thought
       filters were better for his health.
             And he said, quote, "I think basically
       why I changed to a filtered cigarette was more
       because of the nuisance of tobacco getting into
       my mouth than anything else."
             He was asked:  Did you have any health
       concerns about smoking that caused you to
       switch to filters?
             Do you remember what he said?
             He said:  Well, I don't think really at
       that point in my life I had health concerns
       about smoking, to be truthful.  I really didn't
       smoke any particular cigarette because I
       thought it was healthier or unhealthier, for that matter.
             So health concerns played no role in your
       decision to switch to Marlboro?
             No.
             So to the extent that there is any
       argument in this case that Mr. Caprio was
       somehow misled into switching to filters
       because he thought they were safer, Mr. Caprio
       told you that's not true.  He told you health
       concerns had nothing to do with it.  He did not
       like getting tobacco in his mouth.
             He did testify that sometime in the
       1970s, he switched to light cigarettes because
       they had less tar and nicotine.
             He said by that time, he'd heard that tar
       was dangerous and nicotine was addictive.  So
       he switched to Marlboro Light.
             And he testified that he switched --
       after he switched, he started smoking two packs
       a day because:  I thought smoking two was
       equivalent to maybe smoking one pack of the
       regular type of cigarettes because of better
       filtration system.
             So think about that.  It's like the guy
       who says, you know what I'm going to do? Instead of drinking one 12-ounce glass of beer,
       I'll just drink two 6-ounce glasses instead.
             Mr. Caprio admitted that he knew he was
       smoking more cigarettes.  He wasn't fooled by
       that.
             And you learned also with Mr. Caprio,
       light cigarettes -- and with Dr. Proctor --
       were never advertised on television.
             Ads went off TV January 2nd, 1971, and
       lights weren't even introduced until later.
             Lights had the same warning on the pack
       as filtered -- as full flavored.  Every ad for
       every light had the Surgeon General's warning
       on it.
             Let's talk for a minute about what the
       public was told about filters and lights.
             The evidence was that the defendants
       didn't tell the public that filters and light
       cigarettes were safer.  The Surgeon General and
       the public health community told the public
       that filters and lights were safer.
             The thinking is, if tar is bad, less tar
       is less bad.  And the Surgeon General never
       said that smoking lights were safe.  Surgeon
       General said they were safer. It's undisputed that all cigarettes --
       filtered, unfiltered, lights, full flavored --
       had the same Surgeon General's warnings.  And
       the consistent message was:  If you want to
       avoid the risk, don't smoke.  But if you're
       going to smoke, you're not going to quit, smoke
       lights.
             And why?  Why did the Surgeon General say
       that?  This is the '89 Surgeon General's
       report.  The reason he said that is because
       there were dozens of epidemiological studies
       that were conducted and published by
       independent public health scientists that
       reported that people who smoked filtered
       cigarettes and light cigarettes got less cancer
       than people who smoked full-flavored products.
       That's the '89 Surgeon General report.
             I showed you the others too.  They cited
       studies that proved that.  That's what the
       Surgeon General reported, and that's why the
       Surgeon General, the American Cancer Society,
       and other public health organizations said stop
       smoking.  But if you're not going to stop,
       switch to lights.
             Now, Dr. Proctor says they are all wrong. He said:  Yeah, that's what the Surgeon General
       published, that's what the Surgeon General
       believed, but the Surgeon General was wrong.
             So then I showed him these two monographs
       from the World Health Organization, one in
       2003, one in 2012 that says, you know what?
       The epidemiology does show that lights and
       filters lower the risk.
             One more topic.
             Dr. Proctor told you that Philip Morris's
       competitors thought ammonia was the secret and
       soul of Marlboro and that ammonia makes
       cigarettes more addictive.  Remember all that?
             What you learned on cross-examination is
       that ammonia occurs naturally in tobacco, and
       it's been public knowledge since at least the
       1960s that Philip Morris uses ammonia compounds
       in some of its brands.
             In fact, Philip Morris has had patents
       dating back to the 1960s for the use of ammonia
       compounds and reconstituted tobacco.
             I showed you the study where the
       companies actually worked with the National
       Cancer Institute and studied whether ammonia
       compounds actually worked to make a safer cigarette, because they could lower the amount
       of tar that the smoker was exposed to.
             And finally Dr. Proctor admitted that
       cigarettes with ammonia compounds are no more
       or less addictive than cigarettes without
       ammonia compounds.  In fact, Proctor admitted
       that additive-free cigarettes still cause
       cancer, are still addictive and are no safer.
             Let me tell you something else when they
       are talking about is the company still behaving
       the same way.
             If you want to know what is in any Philip
       Morris brand, you want to know the additives,
       ingredients, go on the website.  It's disclosed
       by brand.  All the amounts aren't disclosed.
       The recipe.  You couldn't go on there and learn
       how to make a Marlboro.
             But you would see a list of all the
       additives and ingredients that are in there by
       brand.
             All right.  Let's go to the verdict form.
             The first question:  Was Ed Caprio
       addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and,
       if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his
       COPD. As Mr. Schlesinger told you, there are
       really two questions you have to answer.
             First, was Mr. Caprio, in fact, addicted
       to nicotine.  And if so, was his addiction a
       legal cause --
             Am I in your way, sir?  Can you see that?
             -- a legal cause of his lung cancer and
       COPD.
             It's plaintiff's burden to prove both.
       Plaintiff has to prove that, in fact, he was
       addicted and it was a legal cause.  And if he
       doesn't prove both, the case is over and we all
       go home.
             So let's talk about the word "addiction."
       Was Ed Caprio addicted to nicotine in
       cigarettes?
             Depends on the definition you use.
       Right?
             You'll look at those jury instructions.
       Addiction isn't defined.  That's something you
       have to decide yourself.  You heard how the
       definition has changed over time.
             Until '88, the Surgeon General said not
       addictive, because it's not intoxicating.
             After '88, Surgeon General said that's no longer required, it is now addictive.
             Remember Dr. Mannino's definition?  He
       said:  Anyone who smokes one or two cigarettes
       a day is addicted.
             If you use that definition, Mr. Caprio is
       addicted.
             Seidman disagreed with Mannino and said a
       person who smokes a pack a day for many years
       may or may not be addicted.  He would need to
       know more.
             He did tell you, though, that it was his
       opinion that Mr. Caprio is addicted and highly
       addicted.  But he admitted that's his opinion
       in every case he's testified in.
             And Mr. Schlesinger said, "I dug
       Herrera."  Referring to Dr. Herrera.  It was an
       interesting deposition, I'll admit.
             Dr. Herrera told you that he too believes
       that Mr. Caprio was addicted.  But he also
       testified he thought that Mr. Caprio was
       smoking a pack a day when he was smoking at
       most four cigarettes a day, and not every day.
             Dr. Herrera told you he believed it would
       be impossible for Mr. Caprio to do what he did
       on January 1st, quit smoking. Dr. Herrera told you he believes that
       people like Mr. Caprio can die from nicotine
       withdrawal.
             And every other witness in the case said
       you never, of course, die from nicotine
       withdrawal.  75 percent of smokers quit on
       their own.
             And here's a record that tells you
       about -- here is a record.  It's October 25,
       2013, record from Herrera that speaks to
       Mr. Caprio's interest in quitting, his
       willingness to accept risk, his mental state.
             Readiness to quit.  This is October of
       2013:  Not interested in quitting.  Willingness
       to accept risk.  Knows risk of blowing himself
       up if he lights up near oxygen.  Remains
       untroubled by this, mental state, but
       overanxious about everything else.
             And, finally, while Dr. Herrera claimed
       to have extensive knowledge of Mr. Caprio's
       social life circumstances, Dr. Herrera has
       never heard of Bryan Rintoul and doesn't know
       that Mr. Caprio has a partner.
             Do you remember when he said that?  You
       are his treating physician, you claim to know everything about his life, his motivations.
       And you don't know that he has a partner he's
       been with for 32 years?
             You know, interestingly, Dr. Herrera
       referred Mr. Caprio to Dr. Kirsch, a
       psychiatrist like Dr. Dorce, for help in
       quitting smoking.  Do you remember that?
             Dr. Herrera sent Mr. Caprio to a
       psychiatrist for help in quitting smoking.  And
       guess what?  Dr. Hirsch -- or Dr. Kirsch did
       not diagnose Mr. Caprio as addicted.
             They had all those records, they showed
       you Dr. Green, the surgeon who met him for a
       couple weeks.  They showed you Dr. Herrera, who
       doesn't know about Bryan Rintoul, but the
       psychiatrist that Dr. Herrera sent Mr. Caprio
       to, to quit smoking didn't diagnose him as
       addicted.
             Let me ask you something.  Why did they
       bring Dr. Seidman all the way down from
       New York and Dr. Mannino down from Kentucky to
       tell you he was addicted when his treating
       psychiatrist works right down the street?
             Dr. Dorce is a triple boarded physician
       who has attended some of the finest schools in this country, schools I would have died to get
       into:  Cornell, Yale, Harvard.
             She works every day, day in and day out
       helping people deal with and beat hardcore
       addictions.  She practices right up the street.
             And she told you that because of her
       patient population, she has a lot of experience
       with people who want to quit smoking and people
       who are addicted to nicotine.
             You know, for anyone to compare Dr. Dorce
       to Anne Browder, the African-American woman who
       was with the Tobacco Institute, and to say that
       she was just a paid witness who was brought in
       here for the money ... I don't think they know
       Dr. Dorce.
             So what did Dr. Dorce tell you?  She said
       there's a diagnostic manual that psychiatrists
       and mental health professionals use around the
       country to diagnose people for substance abuse
       and for addictions called the DSM-5.
             And she said her opinion was applying the
       accepted diagnostic criteria.  While Mr. Caprio
       does have tobacco use disorder, his tobacco use
       disorder does not rise to the level of an
       addiction.  And she went through the different reasons.
             One of the most important was control.
       Control.
             And she walked through those.  And you
       know what?  Mr. Gdanski cross-examined her, and
       he was entitled to do that.
             But let me tell you this.  I don't think
       it really matters much whether you decide that
       Mr. Caprio was, in fact, addicted, because the
       real issue is, was addiction a legal cause of
       his COPD.  And plaintiff has to prove both.
             So let's talk about that.
             Back in voir dire, I talked with you
       about the difference between cause and effect
       and legal cause.  I talked with you about the
       example of a guy being hit by a truck.  Maybe
       you remember, maybe you don't.
             Let me give you a better example.  Here
       in Florida, we all love our beautiful beaches.
       When we go to the doctor, the doctor tells us:
       Wear sunscreen, wear a hat, wear long sleeves,
       don't get too much sun.
             So suppose you go to the doctor and the
       doctor says, You look pretty good.  You have a
       spot on your arm.  On your way out, check with my receptionist.  Get an appointment and let's
       get that checked out and taken care of.  You
       don't do it.
             Six months later, you go to the doctor
       and the doctor was looking at you, Hey, hey, I
       thought we were taking that off.  It's skin
       cancer now.  Stop by the receptionist on your
       way out the door, make an appointment, and
       let's get that thing taken off.  And you don't
       do it.
             So six months later, you come back and
       you're not feeling good at all.  And you're
       talking to the doctor, the doctor looks at you
       and goes, You've got a malignant melanoma.  It
       started on your arm.  It's now metastasized
       throughout your body, and it's bad.  I'm sorry,
       but it's really bad.
             So members of the jury, what was the
       cause, in fact, of the malignant melanoma?  The
       sun.
             But what was the legal cause?  You didn't
       take care of business, you didn't follow your
       doctor's advice, you didn't do what you needed
       to do to avoid getting cancer.
             Mr. Caprio knew since the 1980s, when his uncle Arthur was diagnosed with mild COPD that
       smoking causes COPD.  Yet his uncle Arthur's
       COPD did not motivate him to quit.
             For that matter, even Mr. Caprio himself
       was diagnosed with COPD in 1996.  Once he
       started feeling better, he just kind of resumed
       his life again.
             Throughout his life, Mr. Caprio has
       demonstrated that he has the ability not to
       smoke.
             If you believe his partner's testimony in
       1986, he didn't smoke for six months.  And
       clearly, you know, after six months, all the
       nicotine is out of the system.  The
       upregulation of nicotine receptors have
       downregulated back to normal.
             Mr. Caprio said:  Well, I didn't really
       quit for six months.  I just fooled Bryan.
             MR. HAMMER:  Judge, excuse me.  I have an
       objection to make.  This is an argument as to
       fault, not as to causation.  It's an improper
       argument.
             THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule the
       objection.
             Go ahead. MR. COFER:  You will have to decide
       whether Bryan Rintoul is right and Mr. Caprio
       quit smoking for six months with him back in
       the '80s or whether Mr. Rintoul quit and didn't
       smoke and that Mr. Caprio was able to deceive
       him for six months.
             And that Mr. Rintoul, until I
       cross-examined Mr. Caprio in this courtroom,
       never realized that Mr. Caprio was still
       smoking.  How could that be.  People who smoke,
       you smell the smoke on them.  You smell it in
       the car.
             They lived together.  Right?
             But in any event, Mr. Caprio admits that
       in 2001, he did not smoke a single cigarette
       for somewhere between three and six months, and
       then he only smoked one or two cigarettes a day
       for the next six months.
             And then again in 2005, when he went on
       oxygen full time, he quit smoking for four to
       six months.  And they told you he hasn't smoked
       a single cigarette since January 1st of this
       year.
             Hey, one thing we know.  Mr. Caprio has
       demonstrated that he has the ability to refrain from smoking, and that nicotine does not compel
       him to smoke.
             Lawyers can argue all day.  But those are
       facts, members of the jury.  He has
       demonstrated that he can go for significant
       periods of time without nicotine.
             So here is the legal cause instruction
       that you have.  And you'll have it in your jury
       instructions.
             In order for addiction to have been a
       legal cause of Mr. Caprio's COPD, plaintiff has
       to show that he was, in fact, addicted, and
       that his addiction was so strong and
       substantial that it can reasonably be said that
       but for his addiction, he would have quit
       smoking and he would not have gotten sick.
             There was no evidence of that.  None
       whatsoever.  All of the experts agree that all
       smokers, including addicted smokers, have the
       ability to quit and stay quit.
             Whether they quit depends on their
       motivation and persistence.  They have to want
       to quit and, more importantly, they have to
       want to stay quit.
             The bottom line is addicted smokers can and do quit smoking, and they quit when they
       make up their minds that it's more important to
       them not to smoke than it is to smoke.
             And that's what Ed Caprio did on
       January 1st, 2015.  He made up his mind that it
       is now more important for him not to smoke than
       it is to smoke.
             Where is the evidence that Mr. Caprio was
       any different from the 60 million Americans,
       former smokers who quit?  There simply is none.
             Mr. Caprio always had the ability to
       quit.  Plaintiff has offered no evidence that
       nicotine prevented Mr. Caprio from quitting
       smoking earlier.
             Plaintiff has not met his burden of
       proving that Mr. Caprio was a member of the
       Engle class.
             And if you agree, when you go back to
       deliberate, if you agree, you should ring the
       buzzer and tell the jury -- I'm sorry, tell the
       deputy that you have your verdict.
             Second question.
             Basically, for all of the reasons why the
       answer to question 1 is no, the answer to
       question 2 is no as well. All right.  The next question:  Please
       state as to each defendant whether Mr. Caprio
       reasonably relied to his detriment, reasonably
       relied to his detriment on any statement made
       by the defendant after May 5, 1982, which
       concealed or omitted material information not
       otherwise known or available to him concerning
       the health effects and/or addictive nature of
       smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such
       reliance was a legal cause of his COPD.
             Okay.  Before I talk about the evidence,
       let me tell you one thing about the next two
       questions so there's no confusion.  This is
       actually on page 18 and 19 of your jury
       instructions.
             So when you get the jury instructions, at
       the bottom of 18 carries over to 19.
             If you answer "yes" to either question 3
       or question 4, then comparative fault does not
       apply in this case.
             If you decide, after listening to all the
       evidence that Mr. Caprio is 90 percent
       responsible, if you answer "yes" to either
       question 3 or question 4, comparative fault
       does not apply and he gets 100 percent of the damages.
             So I just want to make sure you
       understand what you're being asked and the
       importance of this question.
             Let's talk about the evidence.  There is
       absolutely no evidence.  No evidence that
       Mr. Caprio reasonably relied on anything any
       defendant in this case said or did in his
       decision to begin and continue smoking.
             What statement?  You heard
       Mr. Schlesinger for a long time.  You heard
       Mr. Hammer for a long time.  They said filters
       and lights.  Those are topics.
             What statement did Mr. Caprio reasonably
       rely on after May 5, 1982, that was a legal
       cause of his COPD or lung cancer?
             Plaintiff did not identify a single
       statement because Mr. Caprio didn't.
       Throughout this case, throughout this trial,
       throughout closing argument, they did not
       identify one single statement that Mr. Caprio
       reasonably relied on after May 5, '82.
             What was the evidence?  Mr. Caprio
       started smoking because his dad, his uncles and
       his friends smoked. From the time he picked up his first
       cigarette, he was on notice that cigarettes are
       dangerous, they cause cancer.
             There was no evidence, members of the
       jury, no evidence that he was enticed into
       smoking or tricked or fooled into continuing to
       smoke.
             He admitted he began smoking because
       everyone else was doing it, and he wanted to
       fit in.
             When the warnings were on the pack in
       1966 and 1970, he continued to smoke and made
       no effort to quit.
             He admitted in 1985, when the warnings
       changed to say smoking causes lung cancer,
       heart disease, emphysema, quitting smoking now
       greatly reduces serious risk to health, he
       didn't change his behavior in any way.
             He admitted he never read the Frank
       Statement, he never heard of the Tobacco
       Institute or the Council for Tobacco Research
       or the TIRC.
             THE COURT:  Hour and 15, sir.
             MR. COFER:  Thank you.  Tell me at an
       hour and a half, please.  I should be done. Thank you.
             THE COURT:  Okay.
             MR. COFER:  He specifically said before
       he filed this lawsuit -- he said this.  I
       cross-examined him.  The last questions I asked
       him, before he filed this lawsuit, Ed Caprio
       said from the stand he never heard, read or saw
       any statement from any tobacco company that he
       believes was fraudulent.
             That admission alone is the reason you
       check "no" to question 3 and question 4.
             It's true he smoked filters and light.
       I've already told you.  He said filters --
       health had nothing to do with filters, didn't
       want tobacco in his mouth.
             When he switched to lights, he
       admitted -- he knew tar was dangerous, he knew
       nicotine was addictive.  He knew cigarettes had
       the same warning.
             And something else, members of the jury.
       There was not a shred of evidence that if the
       companies didn't introduce lights, Mr. Caprio
       would have quit smoking.  His testimony was
       lights caused him to change brands, not that he
       said:  Gee, I'm going to quit, but now I've got lights.
             Remember his analogy.  He said:  It's
       like I buy 2 percent milk instead of whole
       milk, because I think lighter is better.
             But he never said, not once, Mr. Caprio
       never said that his choice was between smoking
       lights and quitting altogether.
             All light cigarettes did was affect his
       brand choice.  And he knew, he knew when he
       switched to lights, he was smoking more
       cigarettes.
             There is simply no evidence that the
       defendants tricked Mr. Caprio into becoming a
       smoker or kept him from quitting.
             And members of the jury, Mr. Caprio never
       identified a single statement that he
       reasonably relied on at any time, much less
       after May 5, 1982, that caused him to continue
       to smoke or affected his decisions in any way.
             And based on the evidence and
       Mr. Caprio's own testimony, the answer to
       question number 3, I respectfully suggest, is
       "no."
             For the very same reasons, the answer to
       question 4 is as well. Okay.  So that takes us to comparative
       fault.
             So if you decide that both Mr. Caprio and
       the defendants are responsible for Mr. Caprio's
       COPD and lung cancer, this is where you can
       assign how much responsibility or fault each
       party has.
             Let me tell you something so there's no
       confusion.  You never get to this question, you
       never get to comparative fault unless you first
       decide he's a class member.  That is a
       completely separate question.
             But if you get here, then you can decide
       how much responsibility to assign to defendants
       and how much to Mr. Caprio.
             You know, I was really, really, really
       surprised when Mr. Hammer suggested that you
       award some fault to Mr. Caprio today, because
       for those of you who were here, for all of us
       that were actually here during voir dire, we
       remember Mr. Hammer standing up and saying Ed
       Caprio accepts no fault, no responsibility
       whatsoever for his COPD and lung cancer.
             And if a juror, potential juror deigned
       to think otherwise -- MR. HAMMER:  Objection, this is improper.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead.
             MR. COFER:  If a juror, they need to say,
       well, I think he may have some responsibility,
       then Mr. Hammer questioned him on it.
             So coming in, you think he already had
       some fault?  My client is starting out behind,
       right?  You can't be fair and impartial, can
       you?  You think he might have some fault --
             MR. HAMMER:  Judge, this is improper
       argument.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             MR. COFER:  He was unequivocal that
       Mr. Caprio accepts no fault.  But then he comes
       in, he's actually listened to the evidence,
       apparently, and so now, well, maybe he does
       have some fault.
             Well, you know, you get to decide if you
       get this far how to allocate fault.
             Let me ask you this.  Would a reasonable
       person in 1964, when they heard about the
       Surgeon General's report, would they have at
       least tried to quit smoking?
             In 1966 when the first warning label went on the pack, would a reasonable person have
       tried to quit?
             In 1970, when the warning was changed
       making it stronger, would he have thought about
       quitting?
             In 1985 when the warning said smoking
       causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema,
       quitting now greatly reduces serious risk to
       health, would a reasonable person have changed
       his behavior in response?
             When Uncle Arthur had COPD.  When
       Mr. Mavrakis' dad had COPD.  When he quit
       smoking at the EST program, quit smoking for
       six months with Mr. Rintoul.  Would a
       reasonable person have started smoking again?
             When he was diagnosed with COPD and
       Dr. Patel sat down with him and had a long
       discussion about quitting smoking and said:
       Hey, it's not abstract anymore, it's not just
       your uncle, your brother-in-law's dad, it's
       you.  You have mild COPD.
             Would a reasonable person have followed
       his doctor's advice?
             And in 2001, after he had two lobes of
       his lung removed and he was cured from cancer, would a reasonable person -- and he quit
       smoking for three to six months, would a
       reasonable person have taught himself to smoke
       again?
             You know, it's one thing to start smoking
       as a teenager.  But it's something to keep
       smoking as an adult.  We all grow up.  We do
       become more mature.  We see the world
       differently, we have responsibilities, we make
       different decisions.
             I mean, who among us thinks if you make a
       decision at age 15, you are stuck with that for
       the rest of your life?  Wouldn't that be a sad,
       horrible way to live?
             Members of the jury, the evidence is
       clear that Mr. Caprio's own actions and
       inactions played a significant role in causing
       him to develop COPD and lung cancer.
             I mean, at bottom, Mr. Caprio is the only
       person on this earth who is in a position to
       act on the information he had.
             Now, you heard a lot of evidence about
       the tobacco companies, and you had this assault
       today with documents and snippets and
       impassioned argument and alliterative argument and confusion and doubt.
             There is no doubt.  There is no doubt
       that you are shaking your heads at some of the
       things that you have seen and heard.
             But answering this question, the issue
       isn't whether you're shaking your heads at what
       you saw or heard.  The question is, has
       plaintiff proved that defendants fooled
       Mr. Caprio in some way that caused him to begin
       or continue smoking, or did Mr. Caprio have the
       information that he needed to make an informed
       decision whether to smoke or quit smoking?
             Plaintiff spent a lot of time showing you
       internal documents from tobacco companies.
       Obviously those documents didn't affect
       Mr. Caprio, because he didn't see them.  You
       can't be fooled by something you didn't see.
             What additional information did
       Mr. Caprio need to decide whether to continue
       to smoke or to quit smoking like the 60 million
       other Americans that have?
             Members of the jury, you can be upset
       with defendants.  You can disapprove of the
       tobacco companies.  But under the law, you can
       only allocate fault for specific conduct that plaintiff proves harmed him.
             I'm just about done.
             Damages.
             Actually, you know what?  This is the
       verdict form.  If you get this far, you fill it
       out.  I'm not going to suggest numbers.  You
       fill it out based on the evidence that you
       heard and who you think was in a position to
       avoid what happened to Mr. Caprio.
             All right.  Damages.  So basically
       question 1 says:  What is the amount of
       Mr. Caprio's lost earnings in the past, lost
       earnings in the future, medical expenses in the
       past, and medical expenses in the future.
             And if you get this far -- and, frankly,
       I don't think you should get this far -- but if
       you do get this far, we did stipulate that his
       past medical expenses is $103,014.  They put it
       up.
             And the amount of past lost wages is
       $206,158.  I think the total is like $309,172.
             So that's the past.  Those were numbers.
       We know what those numbers are.
             With respect to future medical expenses
       and future lost income, there is conflicting evidence of what the future holds.
             You know, they put up a mortality table
       saying that the lifespan of a person a certain
       age is 13-1/2 years.
             Mr. Caprio's recent medical records
       suggest his condition is stable and his disease
       is not progressing, but Dr. Mannino told you
       that he believes Mr. Caprio has end-stage COPD,
       and his definition of end-stage COPD is the
       person has a couple years to live.
             So no one knows what the future brings.
       If you get this far, you'll have to decide
       yourself based on the evidence what an
       appropriate amount is to award for future
       medical expenses and lost earnings.
             And, finally, you know, damages for pain
       and suffering.
             Let me just say this.
             Mr. Hammer asked for $12 million.  And I
       talked with -- you know, it's really hard to
       put numbers in context.  But you remember I
       talked to Dr. Proctor about the $3 million that
       he's earned.
             I said:  Dr. Proctor, if the average
       family in the state of Florida makes $50,000 a year, how long would it take the average family
       to earn $3 million?
             And he kind of sheepishly said:  Several
       lifetimes.
             I said:  No, just 60 years.
             But you know how long it would take the
       average family in Florida to earn $12 million?
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, improper
       argument.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead.
             MR. COFER:  Do you know how long it would
       take?  Getting up every day, whether you feel
       good or not, going to work every day, whether
       your kids have something going on or whatever.
       Do you know how many years it would take to
       earn that?  How many days a week you would have
       to work?  240 years.
             That's what Mr. Hammer suggested would be
       an appropriate amount of money to award in this
       case as compensatory damages.  The noneconomic
       damages.
             240 years.
             They said it's all about money.  I tend
       to agree. All right.  Last question.
             Punitive damages.  The final question
       asks whether you find by clear and convincing
       evidence that punitive damages are warranted
       against any defendants in this case.
             You only get to this question if you
       answer "yes" to questions 3 or 4.
             And for all the reasons I went through,
       members of the jury, the answer to question 3
       and 4 should be "no."
             But if you get this far, let's talk about
       punitive damages.  You are not being asked to
       decide at this phase of the trial an amount of
       punitive damages.
             The issue is whether by clear and
       convincing evidence plaintiff has shown that he
       is entitled to punitive damages.  And clear and
       convincing evidence is defined in the jury
       instructions.
             So don't spend one minute thinking about
       amount.  The question for you now is, is he
       entitled.
             If you decide he is, there will be
       another phase of this trial.  Plaintiff will
       put on evidence, Philip Morris will put on evidence, Reynolds will put on evidence,
       Lorillard will put on evidence, Liggett will
       put on evidence.
             We'll have closing arguments, and that's
       when you get to the amount stage.  So make sure
       when you consider this question, you understand
       what it is you're being asked to decide.
             When you look at the instructions, clear
       and convincing evidence is defined.  It's a --
       they took the scales away.
             It's a much higher standard of proof.
       You will see it must be precise, explicit,
       lacking in confusion, and of such weight that
       it produces a firm belief or conviction without
       hesitation about the matter at issue.
             It's a much, much higher standard.  You
       have to be really convinced that punitive
       damages are appropriate in this case.
             Let me tell you something else.
             You have to decide if you get there that
       punitive damages are warranted based on the
       conduct that harmed Ed Caprio.
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, Judge, that's
       improper.
             THE COURT:  Overruled. MR. HAMMER:  Jury instructions state
       otherwise.
             THE COURT:  No speaking objections, sir.
       Thank you.
             MR. COFER:  You've got to make sure they
       are appropriate based on the conduct that
       harmed Ed Caprio.  You've heard a lot of
       evidence about a lot of other people.  But this
       is Ed Caprio's case.
             The purpose of punitive damages is to
       punish and deter, and under the law you can
       only punish for conduct that harmed Mr. Caprio.
       You cannot punish for harm to others.
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, Judge, improper
       statement of the law.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead.
             MR. COFER:  This case is about Ed Caprio.
       It's note a class action anymore.  Not about
       anyone else.  This is Mr. Caprio's case.  Other
       people have their opportunity to bring their
       own lawsuit and ask for damages --
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, improper.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead. MR. COFER:  This is about conduct and
       whether it harmed Ed Caprio.  I would
       respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that
       nothing the defendants did or did not do harmed
       Mr. Caprio in any way.
             They sold cigarettes.  Cigarettes are a
       legal product.  That alone cannot be a basis of
       liability.  The Engle findings are not a basis
       of liability.
             The evidence was Mr. Caprio always had
       the information he needed to make an informed
       choice whether to smoke or quit smoking.
             THE COURT:  One and a half hours, sir.
             MR. COFER:  I will be done in five
       minutes.  Thank you, Your Honor.
             The evidence was at all times, he had the
       ability to quit smoking.  There was no evidence
       that anything defendants did or did not do,
       said or did not say caused Mr. Caprio to begin
       or continue smoking.
             Dr. Proctor spent six days on the witness
       stand, and he said:  I know nothing about Ed
       Caprio.
             You heard Mr. Schlesinger talk about
       deterrence.  Companies need to be deterred. The companies no longer advertise on
       billboards, on stadiums, on public transport.
       They haven't in 17 years.
             Philip Morris hasn't advertised in
       magazines for 15 years.  The last 15 years, the
       companies had a website.  All of them said
       smoking causes cancer, it's addictive, there is
       no safe cigarette.  If you want information,
       check these links.  Go to the Surgeon General,
       go to public health.
             Since 2009, the FDA has had extensive
       regulation.  They said:  Give us all your
       documents.  We can shut you down if we don't
       like what you're doing.  We can tell you to
       take every ingredient out.
             The companies operate in a much different
       environment, in a much more transparent way
       than they have in the past.
             Members of the jury, I respectfully
       suggest that under the evidence and under the
       law, punitive damages, no matter how much they
       want them, no matter what a focus it is of
       their case, even though that's the entire thing
       they've talked about for five weeks, punitive
       damages are not appropriate in Ed Caprio's case.
             All right.  Let me just say this before I
       go.
             This is a case about one smoker and what
       he knew and what he did with that knowledge.
       And whether he's entitled to recover money for
       his decisions to begin and continue smoking.
             The evidence was he had the information
       he needed.  The evidence was that he had the
       ability to quit.
             You know, back in jury selection, I told
       you there are two sides to every story.  And
       one of your fellow jurors corrected me.  He
       said:  No, really there's three sides.  There's
       one side, there's the other side, and there's
       the truth.
             Members of the jury, I know you will
       reach the truth because you've listened to both
       sides of the story.
             We have the greatest system of civil
       justice that any nation has ever known, at any
       time in the history of this great world.
             And it's because of men and women like
       you who are willing to take time out of your
       lives, five weeks out of your lives, and be here every day so we can resolve this case.
             On behalf of my client, on behalf of the
       defendants in this case, I want to thank you
       very, very much for your dedication and for
       giving us a fair shot.  That's all we ask for.
       I know we've got it.
             Thank you very much.


             MR. BIDEAU:  Counsel.
             Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
             JURORS:  Good afternoon.
             MR. BIDEAU:  I can throw most of this out
       now.  I'll be brief today, in part because I
       think Mr. Cofer left us about 30 minutes to
       split between the other three of us.
             And also because you didn't hear much
       about Lorillard during the course of this
       trial.
             I told you when I got up here in opening
       that I didn't think I would be in front of you
       very often, because I didn't think you were going to hear a whole lot about Lorillard, and
       you didn't.
             You know, out of the 56 years that
       Mr. Caprio smoked cigarettes, he smoked a
       Lorillard brand or he claims to have smoked a
       Lorillard brand for about three or four years
       in 1965 to about 1967, 1968; it was Kent.
             That was the only brand of Lorillard
       cigarettes Mr. Caprio claims to have smoked.
             Can you put up verdict form number 2.
             You know, Mr. Cofer talked about this
       question number 2.  This is where you first get
       to look at each of the defendants.
             I agree with Mr. Cofer that your answer
       should be "no" for all of the defendants.
             But I want to talk a little bit about the
       evidence as to Lorillard on that case.
       Because, frankly, based on the evidence in this
       case, smoking of Lorillard cigarettes could
       never be the legal cause of Mr. Caprio's COPD.
             Mr. Caprio smoked Kent cigarettes for
       such a short time at the very beginning of his
       smoking, decades before he ever got sick.
             As I said, out of the 56 years that he
       smoked, he smoked Kent cigarettes for maybe three or four years.  That's it.
             He hasn't smoked a Lorillard product for
       almost 50 years.  And when he stopped smoking
       Kent, ladies and gentlemen, we know he wasn't
       sick.
             You heard from Mr. Rintoul, you heard
       from Dr. Mannino, and you heard from Mr. Caprio
       himself that he was healthy in the '60s, he was
       healthy in the '70s, he was healthy in the
       '80s, and he was healthy for a good part of the
       1990s.
             And we have one more crucial piece of
       evidence that shows Mr. Caprio was healthy for
       decades after he last smoked a Lorillard
       product.
             Mr. Cofer touched on this a little bit,
       but you remember that both Mr. Rintoul and
       Mr. Caprio mentioned that in the '70s and '80s,
       because of the AIDS epidemic in California,
       they were getting -- Mr. Caprio was getting
       regular health checkups, and he was getting
       blood work and he was getting chest X-rays.
             And both Mr. Caprio and Mr. Rintoul said
       that the chest X-rays and the blood work
       fortunately came back clean throughout the '70s, and throughout the '80s.
             In fact, he was healthy, according to
       Mr. Caprio and Mr. Rintoul, right up until he
       was diagnosed with mild COPD in 1996.
             And Dr. Andrews told you it takes decades
       of smoking before you can develop COPD.
             So how can three or four years of smoking
       in 19 -- at the very beginning of his smoking
       life, back around 1965, 30 years before he was
       diagnosed with COPD, be the legal cause of
       Mr. Caprio's COPD?  It just doesn't make any
       sense.
             And Dr. Andrews told you something else
       very important.  Dr. Andrews said if he quit
       smoking back in 1965 or even 1968 when he
       claimed to have last smoked a Kent cigarette,
       he would have avoided all the risk of his
       disease, all of it.
             Then we turn to questions 3 and 4, and
       I'm going to do this briefly as well.  These
       are the concealment and conspiracy questions.
             And I talked about the fact that the last
       time Mr. Caprio smoked a Lorillard cigarette
       was in approximately 1968.  Obviously that's
       long before 1982, which is the key date on both of these questions.
             The question is:  Did he rely upon
       something from one of these defendants after
       May of 1982.
             Well, we know he didn't smoke any
       Lorillard cigarettes after 1982.  He hadn't
       smoked Lorillard cigarettes for decades before
       1982.
             Frankly, ladies and gentlemen, the
       plaintiffs put not a single Lorillard document
       into evidence.
             When you go back to the jury room and
       look at the evidence, you're not going to see a
       single internal Lorillard document on the
       Lorillard stationery in evidence.  There aren't
       any.
             In fact, the only -- they put one
       Lorillard ad into evidence, and it's an ad for
       Kent dated in 1960, five years before
       Mr. Caprio ever smoked a Kent cigarette.
             No evidence Mr. Caprio ever saw it or
       ever relied upon it.
             And it's an ad for Kent and talks about
       the Micronite filter.
             Well, remember both Dr. Seidman -- I didn't ask a lot of questions in this case, but
       remember both Dr. Seidman and Mr. Caprio
       testified that the one thing they were sure
       about was that Mr. Caprio didn't smoke Kent
       cigarettes because of the Micronite filter.
             So I'm not sure why that one particular
       ad is in the box of evidence that the
       plaintiffs put into this case.
             But there's no evidence Mr. Caprio ever
       saw it or that had any impact on Mr. Caprio.
             Now, Mr. Hammer said something about --
       if I remember his opening -- well, he switched
       to Kent because of some charcoal filter.
             Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to tell
       you there is not a document in this evidence
       that says that Kent ever had a charcoal filter.
       So I don't know where that comes from.  I don't
       know what they're talking about --
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection, Judge, testimony
       in the case.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             Go ahead.
             MR. BIDEAU:  -- but I would suggest,
       ladies and gentlemen, that you not take my word
       for it.  Look at the evidence and see if you see any documents in evidence that refer to any
       charcoal filter in any Kent cigarettes.
             Let's turn now to the punitive damages
       section, because I want to give my colleagues a
       couple minutes to come up here and talk.
             And Mr. Cofer talked about the punitive
       damages.  He talked about the standard being
       clear and convincing evidence.  He talked about
       the fact that the money doesn't go to research,
       doesn't go to the government, doesn't go to
       stop smoking clinics.  If you award punitive
       damages, it goes to Mr. Caprio.
             MR. HAMMER:  Objection.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             MR. BIDEAU:  Over and above whatever
       amount you would have already decided is
       sufficient to compensate him for his injuries.
             And the standard, as Mr. Cofer pointed
       out to you, is that they have to show you that
       Lorillard acted with conscious indifference and
       reckless disregard intending to hurt Mr. Caprio
       by something it did after 1982.
             Now, there's no evidence that Mr. Caprio
       ever saw or heard anything from Lorillard after
       1968, let alone 1982. But, ladies and gentlemen, you didn't
       hear a lot of evidence from us, but I did
       cross-examine Dr. Proctor a little bit about
       Lorillard.
             And you did hear a little bit about Ernst
       Wynder, the scientist.  I think, in fact,
       Mr. Cofer put up a little video by Dr. Wynder
       about some research he was doing.  Everybody
       agreed, Dr. Proctor included, that Dr. Wynder
       was a legend, one of the giants in smoking and
       health.
             He was one of the people who really
       changed the way people thought about smoking
       and health.
             There was no doubt that the work that
       Dr. Wynder -- and I think we talked about
       Dr. Graham, we talked about Dr. Hoffmann, that
       the work that they did was groundbreaking, and
       that millions of Americans quit smoking because
       of the work that they did.
             And the evidence from Dr. Proctor was
       that Lorillard actually worked with and helped
       Drs. Hoffmann, Graham and Wynder.  Lorillard
       provided product to them.  Lorillard provided
       some funding to them.  Lorillard provided information that they needed for those famous
       studies.
             And when Life Magazine brought the mouse
       painting study to the public's attention,
       Lorillard continued to work with Dr. Hoffmann,
       Dr. Graham, and Dr. Wynder throughout the 1960s
       and the 1970s.
             Lorillard worked with Dr. Wynder and
       Dr. Hoffmann when they were at the Sloan
       Kettering Cancer Institute and the American
       Health Foundation.
             And they worked on a series of studies to
       try to investigate what was in cigarette smoke.
       They worked on projects to see if they could
       develop a safer cigarette.
             And they did research to try to reduce
       the harmful effect of phenols or PMOs.
             Folks, that's not reckless disregard.
       That's not conscious indifference.  And
       Lorillard did all that voluntarily.
             It shared its cigarettes, it shared its
       research, it shared its money, and it invested
       in these research projects.
             And then Lorillard made a second and
       special submission to the Surgeon General before the 1964 Surgeon General report, and the
       Surgeon General thanked Lorillard for dealing
       with phenols and other harmful contaminants in
       smoke.
             Now, there was a discussion from
       plaintiffs about product placement.  I know
       there was a big thing with Dr. Proctor, and
       Mr. Cofer talked a little bit about this.
             But one of the things that Dr. Proctor
       told us was, Lorillard never placed its
       products, never paid to place its products in
       movies.
             Dr. Proctor said Lorillard had a
       long-standing policy of refusing to place its
       products in movies, going back at least 40
       years into the 1970s.
             That's not conscious indifference or
       reckless disregard either.
             As Mr. Cofer pointed out, there is no
       need in this case for punitive damages.  There
       certainly isn't any need to prevent any company
       from concealing the dangers of smoking.  Those
       dangers are well-known, and Lorillard actually
       worked with the scientists who helped discover
       those issues. So your answer should be "no" for
       Lorillard.  In fact, for all the defendants
       here.
             You know, ladies and gentlemen, we all
       make choices on how we live our lives.  We make
       choices to do things we enjoy, even if they
       come with risk.  Some of us choose to smoke and
       some of us don't.  Some of us choose to drink
       alcohol, some of us don't.  Some of us eat
       healthy, and some of us don't do that.
             Like everyone else, Mr. Caprio had an
       absolute right to make the choices about what
       he wanted to do with his life and about matters
       that affected his health.
             But, ladies and gentlemen, with the right
       to make those decisions about your health comes
       responsibility for those decisions.
             Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for
       your time.  I said I would be brief, and I
       think I gave my colleagues at least a few
       minutes to get up here and talk.  Thanks.


             MS. RUIZ:  Good afternoon, everyone.
             You will be glad to hear, and as you've
       seen, I'm going to keep my comments brief.
       It's been a pleasure to be here before you.  I
       thank you for the time and attention that
       you've paid to this case.
             I'm going to try not to repeat what
       you've already heard from Mr. Cofer and
       Mr. Bideau and focus my comments on what you're
       being asked to decide with respect to Liggett.
             Now, the Court has already determined as
       a matter of law that Liggett brand cigarettes
       did not cause Mr. Caprio's illnesses; that is,
       Mr. Caprio was not injured by a Liggett brand
       product.  He didn't develop COPD or lung cancer
       because of a Liggett brand.
             As a result, Liggett doesn't appear on
       the verdict form very often.  You are not going
       to be asked whether Mr. Caprio's smoking of a
       Liggett brand caused his illnesses.
             Instead, the only issue left for you to decide with respect to Liggett is whether
       plaintiff relied on any statement made after
       May 5, 1982, in furtherance of an agreement to
       conceal or omit material information.
             This is the question.
             It's plaintiff's burden to prove his case
       as to each defendant.  That is as to Liggett.
       He has to prove this.
             So with that in mind, what did the
       evidence show with respect to Liggett?
             You heard a lot of arguments about what
       the industry did or didn't do.  Here is what
       Liggett did.
             The evidence showed that Liggett was a
       responsible tobacco company, took its own path.
       We saw evidence that in the 1950s, and
       culminating with the 1964 Surgeon General's
       report, there was emerging scientific evidence
       concerning the risks of cigarette smoke.
             One of the most widely publicized
       studies, you heard about it, was the Wynder
       Graham mouse skin painting study in 1953.
             Liggett, in response to that information,
       what does it do?  It didn't go to the Plaza
       Hotel.  It didn't sign on to the Frank Statement.  It didn't join the TIRC.  Instead,
       it responded to this new information coming out
       by taking its own path.
             I will just run through a couple of
       documents really quickly.
             You remember this 1958 document.  This is
       Plaintiff's 3289.  It's a trip report authored
       by British scientists.  They visited the United
       States.  They visited Liggett, and here is what
       they reported.
             Liggett felt the problem was sufficiently
       serious to justify large-scale investment by
       the company directly in experimental research
       on smoke and cancer.
             They reported that they were told that
       Liggett had already invested considerably more
       in this work than the combined donations of the
       rest of the industry to the TIRC.
             That's on page 5 of the document.
             Liggett invested enormous resources in
       its biological testing program with Arthur D.
       Little, its consultant.  ADL was a preeminent
       scientific consulting firm.
             Together, Liggett and ADL set out to do
       two things:  To see if the Wynder Graham mouse skin painting test could be replicated; and,
       second, to see if they could identify what, if
       anything, in the cigarette smoke was causing
       the problems.
             The Liggett and ADL research was an
       ongoing process, during which both companies
       shared the results of their research with the
       public, ultimately turning over that research
       to the Surgeon General's committee in April of
       1963.
             You might remember the huge stack of
       paper I had with me when I was cross-examining
       Dr. Proctor.  That's Liggett's nine-volume
       submission.  It's in there somewhere.  It's
       Liggett 231.
             Liggett provided almost ten years of
       research to the committee in that submission.
       It covered a lot of ground.
             The members of the committee repeatedly
       praised Liggett and Arthur D. Little for the
       quality of the work and the amount of ground
       covered.
             Here, the Assistant Surgeon General wrote
       to Dr. Kensler at ADL:  We feel that simple
       acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to us is not
       sufficient.
             Please accept on behalf of Liggett and
       ADL our special gratitude for the tremendous
       time, effort and expense in the production of
       the materials for our use.
             Here at Liggett 238.  These are minutes
       from a 1963 meeting of the Surgeon General's
       committee.
             And they report:  These minutes cannot
       possibly record the massive amount of data in
       these reports.  The chairman thanked
       Dr. Kensler and Hainer on behalf of the
       committee for their comprehensive and
       well-organized presentation, as well as the
       documents that had been prepared and those
       still to come.
             Here you see a memo from the U.S.
       Department of Agriculture, also saying that the
       report contains a wealth of information.
             They can't possibly record the many
       findings obtained in the ten-year period of
       productive collaboration.
             Now, Dr. Proctor came here and showed you
       a document.  It's a 1961 Arthur D. Little document called, "L&M, A Perspective Review."
       That's Plaintiff's 2138.
             And Dr. Proctor told you that Liggett
       didn't share that there are biologically active
       materials present in cigarette tobacco that are
       cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous,
       stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful.  That's
       what he told you.
             I invite you to look at Liggett's
       submission.  I think when you do, you'll see
       that Dr. Proctor just did not know what was in
       there.  It's over 700 pages.
             I'm just going to show you a couple of
       excerpts so that you can see what I'm talking
       about.
             Here is volume 1.  This is page 3.  This
       is Liggett researchers concluding that there
       was an association between cigarette smoking
       and overall death rates.
             They go on to tell the committee that the
       effect increases with the amount smoked.
             Liggett also told the committee what it
       found with respect to filters.  Liggett never
       said filters were safe.  In fact, they told
       public health officials -- this is Liggett 2398 -- condensate from filtered smoke is just
       as or almost as carcinogenic as that from
       unfiltered smoke.
             Here is volume 3 of the submission, the
       table of contents.  It lists materials which
       have been suggested as possible carcinogens for
       the human lung.
             It lists seven items in there, including
       arsenicals.  I think that was one of the things
       Dr. Mannino was talking about.  He was talking
       about arsenic.
             Liggett also showed the results of their
       own mouse skin painting studies and a table
       there with the results.
             Liggett also covered nicotine in the
       submission, told the advisory committee the
       action of nicotine on the central nervous
       system is complex, varies with the dose
       administered.  There is little doubt that
       nicotine is a potent central nervous system
       stimulant.
             They are telling the committee here that
       nicotine works on the brain.
             They go on to say in volume 4:  That
       nicotine is a highly active pharmacologic agent in tobacco.  The pleasurable effects of
       nicotine are the reasons why people smoke
       tobacco instead of something else.  Nicotine is
       a potent stimulant of various chemoreceptors
       and one of the most potent central nervous
       system arousal agents known.
             Clearly, this information was not
       concealed by Liggett from the public health
       officials whose job it was to protect the
       health of the country.
             Even with this information, the public
       health community did not come out and find that
       nicotine was addictive until 1988, when they
       changed the definition of addiction so that
       tobacco would fit within it.
             So you see, contrary to what Dr. Proctor
       told you, Liggett's researchers showed the
       committee that painting tar on mouse backs
       caused tumors.
             They identified components of smoke that
       were poisonous, such as arsenic.  Carbon
       monoxide was also mentioned in there.
             And they talked about how nicotine was
       flavorful and the reason people smoke.
             Liggett was not hiding the ball. You heard a lot about industry
       organizations.  You heard that Liggett was not
       a member of the Tobacco Industry Research
       Committee.
             Liggett belonged to the Council for
       Tobacco Research, the CTR, for four years.  A
       little less than four years, actually, from
       March 1964 until January 1968.
             The evidence showed that Liggett was a
       minor player at best with insignificant
       financial contributions to these organizations.
       You heard that Liggett's contribution to one of
       them was a mere .3 percent.
             So ask yourself, what documents or
       letters did you see from any Liggett personnel
       directing any of these organizations to do
       anything?  Absolutely none.
             Where was the evidence of Liggett hiding
       the ball?  Not a single document shows Liggett
       keeping secrets.
             So when you go back into the jury room
       and evaluate Liggett's conduct, along with the
       conduct of these other companies, please ask
       yourself, is there any real evidence of
       Liggett's involvement in concealing information?
             Is there any evidence of Mr. Caprio's
       reliance after May 5, 1982, on any agreement by
       Liggett to do anything?
             The answer is no.
             Of course there's a crucial way to
       evaluate these things.  Did any of the
       statements by any tobacco company group or
       Liggett play any role in Mr. Caprio's
       decisions, especially after May 1982?
             There isn't any evidence that any of this
       would have made any difference to Mr. Caprio.
             We know that from 1966 on, there were
       warnings on the packs.  And as you saw, they
       didn't make a difference to Mr. Caprio.
             Did any statement, any advertisement, any
       conduct whatsoever have anything to do with
       Mr. Caprio's smoking decisions?
             The overwhelming evidence is that it did
       not.  Mr. Caprio never identified anything that
       he saw from Liggett, certainly nothing that he
       would have relied upon after May of 1982 that
       would have made a difference to him.
             Notwithstanding that, Dr. Proctor came
       here, talked to you about advertisements, he talked to you about movies.
             It's up to you to decide whether
       Dr. Proctor had his own agenda.
             Mr. Cofer covered it.  I'm not going to
       repeat it.  But I'll just mention to you, all
       companies advertise, Liggett is entitled to
       advertise.  You didn't see very much about
       Liggett here, and Mr. Caprio didn't mention a
       single Liggett advertisement in the testimony
       that you saw.
             So plaintiff didn't meet his burden of
       proving that he relied as to Liggett on
       anything, on any agreement to conceal
       information after May 5, 1982.
             Because of that, you should check "no"
       for Liggett for question 4.
             And so the last thing I just need to
       mention quickly is punitive damages.  You heard
       a lot about it.  You heard punitive damages are
       intended to punish a defendant for wrongful
       conduct.  They must be based on Liggett's
       conduct and how Liggett's conduct impacted
       Mr. Caprio.
             As you heard, the burden is on plaintiff
       to prove that by clear and convincing evidence. There is no basis for awarding punitive damages
       here.  We don't believe you should even get
       there.
             But if you do, you need to decide whether
       there's any evidence of any wrongful conduct by
       Liggett that caused damage to Mr. Caprio and
       whether it's necessary to send a message to
       Liggett to punish Liggett for the way it's
       currently doing business.
             Based on everything I've just explained,
       punitive damages against Liggett are not
       warranted.
             You heard about Liggett's research in the
       '50s.  Dr. Proctor told you this was an honest
       response to the scientific information that was
       coming out back then.  Even after the warnings
       were on the packs, Liggett to continued to do
       research.
             Liggett was the first company to put
       voluntary warnings on its cigarette packs.
             Today, Liggett is the smallest of the
       cigarette companies.  It's got about 2 percent
       of the market.  There is no need to punish or
       deter Liggett.
             If you get to this point again, you should check "no" next to Liggett.
             Ladies and gentlemen, I ask that you
       please use your common sense and your natural
       reason when you're looking at the evidence in
       this case and making your decision.  And when
       you do that, we think you'll find there is no
       support for plaintiff's claim for money damages
       or punishment against Liggett.
             Thank you.


25           MR. SEIDEN:  May it please the Court? 5466
1           Good morning, Mr. Caprio, Counsel.  
2           Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of 
3 the jury.
4           THE JURY PANEL:  Good morning.  
5           MR. SEIDEN:  I know you've already heard 
6 a lot.  This morning, I want to provide you some 
7 additional reasons as to why your verdict in 
8 Mr. Caprio's case should be for Reynolds and the 
9 other defendants.  
10           Yesterday Mr. Hammer told you that 
11 Mr. Caprio smoked three Reynolds' brands, Camels, 
12 Lucky Strike, and Winston Lights.  
13           But he didn't even mention to you when 
14 Mr. Caprio smoked them, how much he smoked, or for 
15 how long, like somehow that doesn't matter.  Of 
16 course it matters.  
17           The facts matter.  The evidence matters.  
18           According to Dr. Mannino, plaintiff's 
19 expert, Mr. Caprio smoked 80 to 100 pack years, 
20 but Mr. Hammer failed to tell you yesterday, at 
21 most, Reynolds' cigarettes were six and a half 
22 pack years, six and a half out of 80 to 100 pack 
23 years.  
24           If you get to Question 5 on the verdict 
25 form, you may not get there, but if you get there, 5467
1 on the comparative fault question, of course that 
2 matters.  
3           So I want to quickly summarize for you 
4 the evidence about the Reynolds' brands Mr. Caprio 
5 smoked, and let's start with the Camels.  
6           Mr. Caprio smoked them in 1959, and 
7 let's be clear, they were unfiltered.  If there's 
8 claims about filtered fraud and lights, these were 
9 unfiltered, as were the Lucky Strikes.  
10           He didn't smoke Camels based on 
11 marketing.  Remember, he picked them randomly out 
12 of the cigar box at the newsstand, two or three 
13 loose cigarettes a day over a period of three or 
14 four months.  
15           If you do the math, you'll see that 
16 Mr. Caprio smoked no more than 18 packs of Camels, 
17 not pack years, 18 packs.  A pack year is 365 
18 packs.  This was no more than 18 packs.  
19           Mr. Caprio's smoking of Camels amounted 
20 to no more than one-twentieth of one pack year, a 
21 fact you should know.  
22           The next brand is Lucky Strikes.  
23 Mr. Caprio again first purchased them at the 
24 newsstand, randomly picking them out of the cigar 
25 box, not picking them based on marketing.  He's 5468
1 getting them randomly, unfiltered.  Again, that's 
2 in 1959.  
3           1960, he goes on to buy packs -- to buy 
4 cigarettes by the pack, and he picks Lucky Strike.  
5 Presumably he liked the taste when he smoked them 
6 when he got them randomly.  
7           He never told you he bought them based 
8 on marketing.  So he starts in 1960, Lucky 
9 Strikes.  He's smoking five to six cigarettes a 
10 day.  And by the end of year, he's up to eight to 
11 ten.  That's 1960.  
12           1961, he moves on.  He's no longer 
13 smoking Lucky Strikes.  Again, if you do the math, 
14 at most, Mr. Caprio smoked one-half a pack year of 
15 Lucky Strikes, at most.  
16           Combined, those two brands, Camel and 
17 Lucky Strike, weren't even one single pack year.  
18 He never smokes them again.  
19           Plaintiff didn't think you needed to 
20 know that.  Didn't matter.  The evidence doesn't 
21 matter.  Of course it matters.  
22           From 1961 to 1990, that 30-year period, 
23 Mr. Caprio doesn't smoke Reynolds' cigarettes.  
24 For 30 years, he has no relationship with 
25 Reynolds.  That evidence matters. 5469
1           Mr. Caprio has his next Reynolds' 
2 cigarette in mid-1990 or 1991, but a lot has 
3 changed, folks.  Cigarettes, the ads have been off 
4 TV and radio for 18 years.  The warnings have been 
5 on the pack for 24 years.  
6           The cigarette packs that Mr. Caprio did 
7 smoke from 1985 to mid-1990 or 1991, though they 
8 weren't Reynolds', they repeatedly warned him that 
9 cigarettes cause lung cancer and emphysema.  
10           Mr. Caprio was exposed to those very 
11 warnings day after day, week after week, month 
12 after month, year after year before mid-1990.  
13           Those warnings didn't say:  Lights are 
14 safer.  Instead, they say:  Cigarettes cause 
15 emphysema.  Cigarettes cause lung cancer.  
16           Those warnings unequivocally advised 
17 Mr. Caprio that he could achieve great health 
18 benefits from quitting smoking.  
19           All of this information was available to 
20 Mr. Caprio before his first Winston Light.  
21 Indeed, it was in his hands as he held the packs.  
22           And, please, I ask you to focus on the 
23 fact that the warnings were available to 
24 Mr. Caprio, available.  I'm going to come back to 
25 that point in a few minutes. 5470
1           Other things changed before mid-1990 
2 also.  Uncle Arthur's COPD was a very personal 
3 warning to Mr. Caprio, and so was Louise's 
4 father-in-law's COPD.  
5           And Mr. Caprio was interacting with 
6 doctors at least four times a year in the '80 as 
7 he's going for his every three-month chest x-rays.  
8           So that brings us to Winston Lights.  
9 You know from my questions, I had very few of 
10 them, but from my questions to Mr. Caprio this 
11 past Tuesday, that he started smoking Winston 
12 Lights in the mid-1990 or 1991.  
13           But Mr. Caprio never told you how long 
14 he smoked Winston Lights for.  However, his 
15 partner, Bryan Rintoul, gives us the answer to 
16 that, because Mr. Rintoul testified that by the 
17 time he and Mr. Caprio moved back from Atlanta to 
18 Florida in 1993, Mr. Caprio was smoking a 
19 different brand, not Winston Lights or any 
20 cigarette made by Reynolds.  
21           So the evidence you have is Mr. Caprio 
22 smoked Winston Lights beginning in mid-1990 or 
23 1991 and continuing until no later until some time 
24 than 1993.  
25           At most, it's between two and three 5471
1 calendar years, four to six pack years, max.  
2           And we know that just like the 
3 cigarettes before, every pack of Winston Lights 
4 that Mr. Caprio smoked had a Surgeon General's 
5 warning, warning him about the risk of lung 
6 cancer, the risk of emphysema and advising him to 
7 quit for his health.  
8           So for all those three brands total, the 
9 total Reynolds' smoking history by Mr. Caprio, 
10 again, at most, it's between four and a half to 
11 six and a half pack years out of 80 to 100 pack 
12 years.  
13           Plaintiff didn't mention any of that 
14 yesterday.  All they said is Reynolds somehow is 
15 25 percent responsible.  
16           Given all the facts that I just laid out 
17 to you, Mr. Caprio's limited smoking of Reynolds' 
18 cigarettes and his awareness of the risk prior to 
19 smoking Winston Lights, you could justify taking 
20 the 25 percent fault that Mr. Hammer suggested 
21 goes to Reynolds and you could give it all to 
22 Mr. Caprio and give Reynolds zero percent fault.  
23           And if you don't agree, I respectfully 
24 suggest, based on the facts, the proper percentage 
25 is nowhere, nowhere near as high as the 25 percent 5472
1 Mr. Hammer suggested.  
2           I want to turn to Question 3 on the 
3 verdict form and sort of go out of order a little 
4 bit.  This was the fraudulent concealment 
5 question.  
6           I've got a board here so you can look at 
7 it while I'm talking about it.  
8           As you know, it was talked about 
9 yesterday, plaintiff has the burden to prove that 
10 Mr. Caprio identified an actual statement made by 
11 Reynolds after May 5th, 1982, that he relied on.  
12           Any statement after May 5th, 1982, 
13 again, you'll have the verdict form back there.  
14 You you'll have the jury instructions back in the 
15 jury room.  
16           So he's got to identify an actual 
17 statement made by Reynolds, and he's got to do the 
18 same for a statement by Philip Morris and 
19 Lorillard as well.  
20           What were the actual statements 
21 Mr. Caprio relied upon?  
22           We are five full weeks into this trial, 
23 ladies and gentlemen.  If Mr. Caprio actually 
24 relied on an actual statement, why are we all 
25 still here trying to figure out what that 5473
1 statement was?  How come we don't know what it 
2 was?  
3           Mr. Caprio sat right there, three, four 
4 feet away from you, and testified for three full 
5 hours.  Why didn't he tell us what the actual 
6 statement was?  Why are we left to guess, to 
7 wonder, to speculate?  
8           After all, the burden of proof on this 
9 issue sits right here at this table, at 
10 plaintiff's table.  Why are we guessing and 
11 wondering?  
12           In fact, it's interesting, there was 
13 some interesting testimony when Mr. Hammer was 
14 questioning Mr. Caprio, and I want to share it to 
15 you because I think it speaks volumes on this 
16 issue.  
17           This is plaintiff's own lawyer asking 
18 him questions.  Let's read it together.  
19           Question by Mr. Hammer:  You mention 
20 that it's still being sold.  
21           This is to Mr. Caprio.  
22           Did you hear over the years the tobacco 
23 companies say:  Hey, if it's proven to be 
24 dangerous, we'll stop making it?  Did you hear 
25 comments like that throughout the years? 5474
1           Answer:  Did I hear them say that 
2 they --  
3           Question:  Did you hear those kind of 
4 comments throughout the years?  
5           Answer by Mr. Caprio:  No.  No.  
6           Ladies and gentlemen:  No.  No.  That's 
7 the very answer you ought to put on your verdict 
8 form for the question of fraudulent concealment:  
9 No.  No.  Use Mr. Caprio's own words.  
10           There's no real mystery here.  There is 
11 no identifiable statement, not for my client, 
12 Reynolds, not for any of the defendants.  
13           For that reason alone as to Questions 
14 Number 3 on the verdict form and the related 
15 question, Question Number 4 as to each of the 
16 defendants, you should check no on the verdict 
17 form.  
18           But even if you disagree, Mr. Caprio 
19 still can't prevail on these claims.  There's 
20 reasons that Mr. Cofer and others talked about 
21 yesterday, but there's an additional reason.  
22           For these claims -- I want to put the 
23 question back up.  
24           For these claims, Mr. Caprio also has to 
25 prove that his reliance on actual statements was 5475
1 reasonable.  
2           One of the questions you're going to 
3 have to answer is:  Were the facts actually 
4 available to Mr. Caprio?  
5           Remember a few minutes ago I asked you 
6 to focus on the issue of available.  Not otherwise 
7 known or available to him, it's right there.  It's 
8 part of that question.  
9           Of course the information was available 
10 to Mr. Caprio.  We talked about the warning 
11 labels, but all the way back to 1964, Mr. Caprio 
12 knew about the 1964 Surgeon General's report.  
13           Of course that information was available 
14 to him.  You kept hearing yesterday about how 
15 anyone could get the Surgeon General's report.  
16           So that's Question 3 and Question 4, as 
17 to those questions, 3 and 4 on your verdict form, 
18 I'd ask that you check no as to Reynolds and the 
19 other defendants.  
20           So I want to spend my remaining time 
21 talking about the conduct evidence plaintiff 
22 offered through Dr. Proctor in connection with his 
23 claim for punitive damages.  
24           You remember Dr. Proctor was one of the 
25 few witness that I questioned.  I questioned him 5476
1 for about three hours.  
2           Yesterday you heard Mr. Cofer talk about 
3 how there are two or maybe three sides to every 
4 story, and I briefly talked about this during my 
5 opening statement weeks ago.  
6           I told you about the importance of 
7 context, hearing both sides, hearing the whole 
8 story. 
9           And I suggested you wouldn't hear the 
10 whole story from plaintiff's experts, at least not 
11 voluntarily, not on direct exam.  
12           Time and time again, Dr. Proctor only 
13 told you half a story on direct exam.  And it 
14 wasn't until we had the opportunity to 
15 cross-examine him that the full story was 
16 revealed.  
17           If you reach the question of whether 
18 punitive damages should be awarded in this case, 
19 we don't think you should ever get to that 
20 question on the verdict form.  
21           But if you do, I ask you to consider the 
22 full story, not the half stories Dr. Proctor told 
23 you on direct.  
24           And I'd ask that you be mindful in your 
25 consideration -- you'll see this jury instruction 5477
1 back there, and, again, you'll have the jury 
2 instructions back there with you.  
3           I ask that you be mindful in your 
4 consideration of whether punitive damages are 
5 warranted for defendants' conduct, that your 
6 decision must be based only on the same or similar 
7 conduct which has been shown by clear and 
8 convincing evidence to have caused Mr. Caprio's 
9 COPD and lung cancer.  
10           And Dr. Proctor's testimony simply was 
11 not focused on conduct or similar conduct that had 
12 any connection to Mr. Caprio.  
13           Let's take a look at a few examples.  
14           On direct examination, Dr. Proctor told 
15 you about the more doctors smoke Camel ads, but on 
16 cross you heard those ads backfired.  
17           They didn't provide reassurance.  
18 Instead they raised consumer awareness about the 
19 risks of smoking.  
20           Regardless, Mr. Caprio never testified 
21 that he saw those ads.  They had nothing to do 
22 with him.  
23           Let's talk about the Frank Statement.  
24 On direct you heard about the Frank Statement.  
25 All Dr. Proctor told you was it was the Magna 5478
1 Carta and that it was intended to reassure the 
2 American public.  
3           But on cross-examination of Dr. Proctor, 
4 you learned that the Frank Statement frightened 
5 people. 
6           People quit smoking or cut back on the 
7 number of cigarettes they smoked as a result of 
8 the Frank Statement.  
9           Just like more doctors smoke Camels, it 
10 backfired.  It didn't reassure people, but on 
11 direct exam, Dr. Proctor didn't tell you any of 
12 that. 
13           And, regardless, in terms of its 
14 connection to Mr. Caprio, you never heard 
15 Mr. Caprio testify that he read the Frank 
16 Statement.  
17           On direct, you heard about TIRC and CTR.  
18 Dr. Proctor said it was just simple distraction 
19 research, a smoke screen. 
20           It took cross for you to find out 600 of 
21 the articles that they funded have been relied 
22 upon and cited in the U.S. Surgeon General's 
23 report.  
24           And what did Mr. Schlesinger tell you 
25 yesterday?  He said before something goes in one 5479
1 of these books, before they sign an article, it's 
2 heavily vetted.  
3           And you heard about the expert review 
4 committee reviews all those articles.
5 Apparently, there's only one person who thinks 
6 those 600 articles are of no value. 
7           That one person is Dr. Proctor, and what 
8 do we know about him?  He can't even tell you he's 
9 read a single one of them.  
10           Imagine that.  He's decided no value.  
11 Everyone else decides they're worthy of print in 
12 here.  
13           But Dr. Proctor can tell you they're no 
14 value.  How does that work?  How is that evidence?  
15 How is that reliable?  How is that credible.  
16           And regardless of all this in terms of 
17 connection to Mr. Caprio, you never heard him say 
18 he heard of TIRC, CTR, the Tobacco Institute 
19 before he filed this lawsuit.  He didn't.  There's 
20 no connection.  
21           On direct you heard that Reynolds hid 
22 the truth about the dangers of smoking, but on 
23 cross and only cross, you learned that 
24 Dr. Rodgman, the Reynolds' scientist, shared his 
25 discovery regarding carcinogens he found in smoke 5480
1 with the Surgeon General's expert committee in 
2 advance of the '64 expert report.  And the Surgeon 
3 General published it.  They were available.  
4           On cross you learned that Reynolds' 
5 scientists that published scientific literature 
6 which the U.S. Surgeon General cited to in ten 
7 different reports from '64 to 2010. 
8           Go back to Mr. Schlesinger's own words 
9 yesterday.  This stuff is carefully vetted before 
10 it goes in the Surgeon General's report.  
11           And they're relying on Reynolds' 
12 research.  Reynolds is disclosing it, and the 
13 Surgeon General is relying on it for state of the 
14 art science.  
15           Regardless of any of that, in terms of 
16 connection, Mr. Caprio never testified that he 
17 heard any statement from Dr. Teague, Dr. Rodgman, 
18 or any scientist or executive at RJ Reynolds or 
19 any other defendant.  
20           Perhaps the greatest example at trial of 
21 a partial story was Project SCUM.  Dr. Proctor 
22 told you about it during direct exam.  He didn't 
23 even tell you half a story.  He told you fragments 
24 of a story.  
25           I want you to think back about how you 5481
1 felt about my client, Reynolds, at the point in 
2 time when Dr. Proctor finished testifying about it 
3 on direct exam.  
4           You knew part of the story, not like now 
5 when you know the whole story.  So think back.  
6 Were you mad?  I get it.  
7           I understood during openings when I was 
8 telling you about it, trying to give you some 
9 context, you didn't know whether I was telling you 
10 the truth, whether those facts would be borne out.  
11           So you heard part of the story, and I 
12 understand that you were mad.  Folks, that wasn't 
13 by accident.  It was intentional, and it was 
14 designed.  
15           Dr. Proctor is a professional witness.  
16 He gets paid millions of dollars, and you know 
17 what?  He's charging even more now to do it.  And 
18 nothing, nothing, not a single thing Dr. Proctor 
19 does at trial is by accident.  
20           It was about telling a small part of a 
21 half a story to get you mad.  Why didn't he tell 
22 you the full story about that or any of the other 
23 things I'm talking about today?  
24           And there's more examples.  You've seen 
25 them during my cross.  I don't have time to cover 5482
1 them all now.  
2           He didn't do it because Dr. Proctor's 
3 sole purpose his, quote, unquote, noble purpose, 
4 his $3 million purpose is just to get you mad, 
5 even if that means he tells you part of a story, 
6 an incomplete story.  
7           So I want to go back to Project SCUM for 
8 a minute.  The full story -- 
9           THE COURT:  You only have two minutes.  
10           MR. SEIDEN:  The full story shows you it 
11 wasn't what Dr. Proctor had you believe, not even 
12 remotely.  
13           On cross you learned it had no 
14 connection to Mr. Caprio, and Dr. Proctor knew 
15 that all the way back in his deposition. 
16           You learned it only involved a few 
17 mid-level employees in a company of 9,000 
18 employees.  You learned no executive officer ever 
19 approved it.  All facts he didn't tell you.  
20           You learned that he considered the 
21 reprimand serious.  And you learned the, quote, 
22 unquote, plan that he never told you what it was 
23 to sell cigarettes in stores that were already 
24 selling cigarettes.  
25           And finally on cross, you learned about 5483
1 certain of Reynolds' company-wide policies and 
2 practices related to sexual orientation around 
3 2001, the time of the policy.  
4           You saw the draft document Dr. Proctor 
5 showed you was empathetical to the way Reynolds 
6 did business.  
7           You know, it was interesting yesterday.  
8 Mr. Schlesinger reflected on how "progressive," 
9 his word, how progressive it was that in 2015 an 
10 openly gay man could be here in court without any 
11 prejudice.  
12           And I agree it is progressive, but you 
13 know what?  In 2001, Dr. Proctor used that very 
14 word, "progressive," to describe Reynolds' 
15 policies as related to sexual orientation.  
16           I've got do try to wrap up.  
17           If you get to the issue of punitive 
18 damages and you think about deterrence and 
19 punishment, I would submit that the Master 
20 Settlement Agreement that you heard about that 
21 Mr. Cofer talked about provides deterrence, that 
22 it constrains the way, it puts severe operating 
23 restrictions on the companies today, and those 
24 restrictions continue in perpetuity.  
25           You heard about the FDA.  I'm not going 5484
1 to repeat that.  But they've been regulating the 
2 industry since 2009.  
3           I went through the board of the faces.  
4 You saw none of those folks are there any more.  
5 They're all gone.  Many have passed away, but 
6 they're all gone from the company.  
7           Dr. Proctor maybe wanted to give you the 
8 impression they're still controlling the company.  
9 They're not.  It's a new company now, but it's a 
10 company that's inherited the legacy. 
11           They've inherited the MSA requirements.  
12 They've inherited the FDA regulation.  They are 
13 carefully watched and monitored now.  It's not 
14 like it was before.
15           THE COURT:  Time is up, sir.  
16           MR. SEIDEN:  Can I have one minute to 
17 wrap up, please?  
18           THE COURT:  Sure.  
19           MR. SEIDEN:  Plaintiff gets to go last.  
20 Defense counsel will not have a chance to respond, 
21 so I want you, as you listen to plaintiff's 
22 rebuttal, consider what Mr. Cofer, Mr. Bideau, 
23 Ms. Ruiz, myself, if we had a chance to respond, 
24 what is it we'd say?  
25           Ask yourself:  What's the full story? 5485
1 Have I been told it, or are portions of a document 
2 just being read to me out of context?  Does what 
3 I'm being told have anything to do with 
4 71-year-old Mr. Caprio?  Did Mr. Caprio testify 
5 about it?  
6           Whether it's whispered to you, whether 
7 it's yelled at you, whether it's wrapped up in a 
8 song lyric, a book reference, a movie reference, I 
9 ask you to consider all those things.  
10           This may be my last chance to speak to 
11 you.  If we don't go to punitive damages and have 
12 additional witnesses and argument next week, this 
13 is it.  This is my last chance. 
14           So I think this is day 17 or 18 for many 
15 of you.  I know when -- 
16           THE COURT:  Nineteen.  
17           MR. SEIDEN:  -- when you got that notice 
18 in the mail, you didn't know you'd be here so 
19 long.  We all very much, plaintiff's, defendants', 
20 and the Court, we all very much appreciate your 
21 service.  
22           Thank you all so much.  